Puritan Reformed Theological Seminary

**Comparison of Laws in the Ancient Near East with the Pentateuch**

Joshua Lamb

132: Old Testament Introduction

November 19, 2015

Introduction
============

The Law Codes in the Old Testament have often been studied along with a
collection of other law codes in the Ancient Near East (ANE). In
particular, scholars of the form critical school have often observed
many similarities between the Old Testament and these other codes,
consequently dismissing the OT laws as a collection which borrowed from
earlier societies. Is this truly the case? If not, what differences are
there between the laws of the OT and other cultures of the time? A
deeper examination reveals that the perspective of the OT laws come from
a radically God-centered worldview that colors them in a much different
way. This paper will summarize the codes that are in existence before
moving on to a comparison between ANE laws and the Pentateuch.

Overview of the Codes
=====================

We will begin with a summary of the different law codes that existed
prior to and during the time of the Pentateuch. There are nine major law
codes that existed in the ANE[^1]. This number can be shortened and more
broadly classified under the societies and regions in which they
operated: the Sumerian laws, the Old Babylonian laws, the
Middle-Assyrian laws, the Hittite laws, and the Biblical laws[^2]. The
Sumerian laws present the oldest known legal codes in existence,
including the Laws of Ur-Nammu and Lipit Ishtar. Chronologically, this
is the best place to begin our examination.

### Sumerian Laws

The oldest law code is the Law of Ur-Nammu, who was a founding ruler of
the third dynasty of Ur and builder of the Ziggurat which still stands
today at that location. Scholars have traditionally believed that
Ur-Nammu wrote the laws himself, but recent evidence suggests that it
may actually be his son, Shulqi, who wrote them in his honor[^3]. As is
true of many other codes in the ANE, the purpose of Ur Nammu’s laws was
for propaganda. They communicated the message that he was a ruler who
was appointed by the gods to bring peace and administer justice to his
territory[^4].

The laws of Lipit Ishtar have a similar style to that of Ur-Nammu but
have a somewhat greater breadth in subjects. They cover most aspects of
life in the ANE, including family, inheritance, property, slaves, debt,
and wages.

Taken together, these texts provide the foundation in history for many
of the thought processes of law in the ancient near east, including the
ruler’s relationship to the divine and how justice would be tested by
the gods.

### Old Babylonian (Akkadian) Laws

The Laws of Eshnunna (circa 1770 B.C.) are unfortunately damaged in the
place where the author was expected to be named. These laws also differ
in form from the Sumerian texts in that they do not have the expected
tripartite (prolog, body of law, epilog) format[^5].

The famous Code of Hammurabi is the first ANE code to be discovered and
one of the largest extant manuscripts that are available today. The code
contained 282 laws which covered property, family, and commerce[^6]. It
was written around 1750 B.C. and unearthed by archeologists uncovering
the city of Susa (the same city mentioned in Esther and Daniel)[^7]. It
has been vastly studied and compared to the laws in the Bible, with
several similarities. In the same vein as the earlier law codes, it was
likely that Hammurabi composed this in order to justify his reign and to
leave a mark that would show his fairness and equity to the gods[^8].
That is to say, it was not strictly enforced as the law of the land, but
more a commendation on Hammurabi himself.

### Middle-Assyrian Laws

The Middle-Assyrian laws were thought to have been written around the
14^th^ century B.C. but definitively existed during the reign of Tiglath
Peleser I in the 12^th^ century B.C.[^9] Like many other texts, these
laws have been preserved because they were copied as practice during
scribal training[^10]. There is a distinguishing of social classes in
the laws, which is par for the course in ANE legal documents. The
Middle-Assyrian laws differ from the other collections because they omit
any political prologs as well as show much evidence of revisions that
took place over time[^11]. One of the most striking differences is the
level of violence within them. The punishments for even petty offenses
often involve mutilation such as chopping off ears and noses. They are
also much more tolerant of domestic violence towards women, allowing for
pulling of hair and twisting of ears without any legal penalty[^12].

### Hittite Laws

The Hittite Laws show a much stronger development of a legal system than
the previous collections. The most notable difference is that they show
more of a regard for what the West refers to as the “rule of law”[^13].
The famed “river ordeal” that was a common test of guilt in the earlier
laws is also lacking. The laws are very clearly utilitarian and focused
on reparation of damages instead of retaliation. In fact, there is an
interesting absence of references to the divine will, which was found in
many of the previous works[^14]. One interesting feature of the Hittite
laws is in their strange provisions, such as the allowance of intimate
relations with a ghost[^15].

### Biblical Laws

On the surface, there are many similarities between the Bible and law
codes of the other societies in the ANE, particularly the Old Babylonian
(Akkadian) laws such as the Code of Hammurabi. Concepts such as levirate
marriage, the law of retribution, and judgeship by elders are a common
feature in all ANE codes. However, the underlying suppositions and goals
of the Biblical laws are far, far different from those of other
societies. These comparisons will be made shortly, but a list of the
laws sections in the Pentateuch are in order. John Walton categorizes
the legal sections in the Pentateuch as follows[^16]:

1\. Covenant Code-Exodus 20:22-23:19

2\. Decalogue-Exodus 20:2-17; Deuteronomy 5:6-21

3\. Ritual Decalogue- Exodus 34:14-26

4\. Deuteronomic Law.- Deuteronomy 12-26

5\. Holiness Code-Leviticus 17-25

6\. Priestly Procedures- Leviticus 1-7, 11-16

The Bible presents a perspective on law that is radically theocentric.
The law is not oriented pragmatically for the benefit of society, but
rather towards a lifestyle which is pleasing and acceptable to God. One
might assume that the other law codes of the ANE contained similar
references to the divine, but in truth these references are lacking on
the whole. It is this addition of the “cultic” which makes the
Pentateuch laws truly unique[^17]. We will now turn to examine in more
depth the differences between Israel’s law and that of her peers.

Pentateuch vs. ANE Law Codes
============================

This section will begin by framing a shared worldview between the
societies of the ANE and how their understanding of Justice was
reflected in their laws. It will then discuss the clear and striking
differences between the Pentateuch and other legislation in the Ancient
Near East.

Commonalities
-------------

Life in the ANE centered far more around the communal life of a society
that people in the West often consider. The king was often viewed as
either an ambassador or son of the gods. This is as true regarding the
Egyptian Pharaoh as it is regarding Hammurabi. As a result, the monarch
of a society had very sweeping and unilateral powers[^18]. While he no
doubt had counselors, there was not a “rule of law” system as is common
in the West today. Even in Israel, God’s mediator (Moses etc.) was a
center of the life of the people. As a result, law systems were not as
essential as they are in modern societies. Most cases in the ANE were
resolved by means of arbitration. There were, in fact, three spheres in
which law operated: the king, the temple, and the elders[^19]. The king
was often not involved unless the dispute involved matters of the crown
or escalated to such a nature as warranted his attention. The temple was
involved in some matters as well, but the primary focus rested on the
elders who would decide disputes. These resolutions often took place at
the city gate, as is illustrated in the account of Boaz.

Men were more eager to participate in judging cases at the city gate
because it was viewed as an honor to be involved in trying
disputes[^20]. This is a far different mentality from opening the mail
and discovering a summons to jury duty. It is through the lens of this
cultural context that the legal provisions of the ANE should be viewed.
If not, the punishments and cases of ANE law codes seem exceptionally
cruel and barbaric. While some laws in the ANE are indeed a gross
violation of human rights, there is a sense in which these laws describe
a mindset in which communal peace and balance are a priority.

The first central concept that ANE law codes share with the Pentateuch
is the idea of *lex talionis* or “law of retribution”[^21]. This concept
is prevalent in *all* ANE law codes and was a fundamental principle of
justice in society[^22]. The Bible’s references to this concept are
contained in all three legal books (Exodus 21:24, Leviticus 24:20,
Deuteronomy 19:21). Lex talionis served as a central tenant of justice,
ensuring that damage inflicted would equal damaged received. It is a
concept which served to promote equilibrium in society. It is important
not to run to quickly to the notion that everyone scurried about
plucking eyes and teeth. In day to day life, this would have served as a
common principle which prevented some (not all!) crimes from taking
place. Furthermore, lex talionis was administered in the context of
official judgment, it was not simply up to an individual to seek
vengeance in a vigilante manner. In societies that did not operate
according to the rule of law and had no system of established court
circuits, this principle served as a worthy alternative. It is a notion
that has influenced many other conceptions of law through the ages.

The second shared legal principle is that of the *judicial oath*. The
Pentateuch contains many solid references to oaths, including the
people’s confirmation of the covenant in Exodus 24:7. Oaths can be used
in order to ratify legal action, but also to swear to a truth during a
judicial trial. This second purpose is prevalent in ANE law codes. It
was commonly accepted that to “swear by the gods” meant one was
innocent. Cases were decided and closed almost immediately if someone
took an oath, due to the belief that the gods would avenge their
reputation if the person was committing perjury[^23]. Since these gods
were false, no doubt many people escaped the justice they deserved.
However, those who were caught perjuring were given the punishment that
would have been due to the person they accused.

The third legal principle is that of the *paterfamilias*. This concept
recognized the father as the head of household with authority over his
household[^24]. This was applied even to the death penalty in matters of
disobedient children in the home. The father was thought to have the
right to take the life of those who belonged to him. Although the Bible
applies this concept in a theocentric way, there is a shared perspective
on the seriousness of the offense (Deuteronomy 21:18-21).

The fourth shared concept is *legal protection of marriage*. The
practice of levirate marriage was common. In societies that were often
tribal in nature, it was expected that propagation of the family line
would continue. Men were expected to carry on the name of deceased
relatives by marrying their wives who were widowed. There is
confirmation that this occurred in Hittite society and many others[^25].
A high view of marriage in general also permeated these societies, as
reflected my many provisions in their legal codes. It is hard to read
the Code of Hammurabi without being struck by the dominant theme of
punishment for various forms of sexual misconduct. It is a sweeping but
true statement that adultery was punishable by death in *every* ANE
society. The Hittite laws even allow for the homicide of an adulterer
and adulteress by the husband who discovers them “in flagranti delicto”
(in the act)[^26]. The Pentateuch would stress holiness where ANE laws
would stress the pragmatic importance of marriage to society, but both
arrived at the judgment that violations of marriage were capital
offenses (Leviticus 20:10)[^27]. Many other inappropriate relationships
were also punished, such as those between people who were too closely
related[^28].

All things considered, there are many similarities in the types of
infractions prohibited by laws in the ANE and the Pentateuch. A
comparison between Exodus 20-23 and the Laws of Hammurabi reveal several
similar legal cases and pronouncements (leading liberal scholars to
assume Moses borrowed content from Hammurabi)[^29]. Although ANE laws
and the Pentateuch contain numerous differences, there was a shared set
of legal considerations that governed these societies. Along with these
considerations was the common belief that mankind would be held to
account in *some* way by the divine. Hammurabi’s stele is even addressed
to “the gods and the ruling elite”[^30]. It is at this point we move to
discuss the differences of the Pentateuch.

Differences
-----------

Although the Pentateuch holds much in common with the law codes of other
ANE cultures, it has a vastly different starting point. There are
monumental differences in the spirit and intent of the law itself, which
makes all the difference in how it is viewed and applied.

### Cultic Law

The single most important point of difference is in the addition of
“cultic law”[^31]. Although one might expect the polytheistic cultures
around Israel to have their religious beliefs reflected in the law
codes, this is far from the truth. Although Hammurabi’s code and others
refer to their respective deities in their prologs and epilogs, the main
body of legal content contains very scarce references to a connection
between practical obedience and its impact on spirituality. Other than
in reference to punishment for perjury, the gods were rarely mentioned.
There are points at which the “will of the gods” is referred to in ANE
literature, but Israelite law *easily* dwarfs them in terms of frequency
and intensity. The sacrificial system as outlined in Leviticus is
without parallel in ANE legal documents. Stated another way, ANE law
codes had almost no thought to spiritual wisdom or application of legal
principles. The reasoning for the laws in Israel was so that they could
live as a holy missionary community to show forth the glory of God. This
high view of the law was not shared by any of Israel’s peers. Their view
of the law focused more on the pragmatic principles of lex talionis that
would keep communities functioning in good order.

The content for ANE laws consists mainly of what are called casuistic,
or “case law” references. These laws consisted of prostasis & apodosis
statements (e.g. *if* an ox is gored, *then* a fine must be paid). As a
whole, they outlined a series of scenarios and the punishment due to
each of them. It is worth calling to mind again that these laws were not
universally enforced, and application could vary from region to region.
While this type of casuistic law is present in the Pentateuch, there
exists another type of law that is unique – *divine prohibition*. Using
the example of the Decalogue, Israel received laws from God Himself in
the form of “Thou shalt not” statements. At times, these were not given
a specific curse, but rather were to be obeyed because they originated
from God Himself, and as such were tied up with his nature and
character. Getting more to the root – ANE laws were different from
Israel because they had fundamental differences in understanding the
divine. Most ANE societies were polytheistic and believed that “the
gods” were in need of food, drink, bathing, and sex just like humans
were[^32]. Taking this understanding along with the creation myths of
many ANE societies easily leads to the conclusion that they did not view
the divine as morally perfect. The behavior of the gods was depicted in
largely anthropomorphic fashion and was sinful. So any connection
between the divine being(s) and the law was more for pragmatic purposes
(e.g. to commend Hammurabi’s leadership to the gods) than it was for any
real moral reason.

Conversely, Israel believed in a God of absolute justice and holiness,
who was of purer eyes than to look upon evil. Israel was called by God
to “be holy for I am Holy” (Leviticus 20:26). In fact, Leviticus as a
book is completely devoted to the concept of holiness. The practical
ramifications of this theology cascaded throughout the entire system of
Israelite society. The concepts of ritual uncleanness, sacrifice, and
temple worship were at the very heart of day to day life in Israel.
While other societies had pagan sacrifices and temples, nowhere but
Israel was this system so closely linked *to the law* in concert with
the practical worship of God. This was due to the source of law in
Israel being viewed as God Himself instead of tradition or another more
obscure source (even the depiction on Hammurabi’s stele is not in
reference to him receiving direct divine revelation.

### View of Personhood

Israel’s unique infusion of cultic principles into the legal code was
not the only difference in their law. The view of *people* was also
different in the Israelite legal system. In most ANE legal documents,
there is a tripartite class system that is reflected. People belonged to
either a free, half-free, or slave class[^33]. The free class consisted
of nobility or wealthier citizens who possessed more economic
independence. The half-free class consisted of workers and those that
were dependent in some way (roughly equivalent to today’s working
middle-class in the West). The slave class consisted of those who were
owned as property by others, either through indentured servitude due to
calamities (famines etc.) or from war captivity. The Law of Hammurabi,
in particular, is a classic example of the difference in treatment of
these classes. While the Pentateuch did contain laws pertaining to the
treatment of slaves, the fundamental application of the law was
different. In general, the Bible placed much more emphasis on the value
of human life – regardless of the class of the person. Most ANE law
codes were partial to giving the higher class a more lenient version of
the code than would be applicable to the slave class. The Pentateuch as
a whole does not share this partial view of justice. Tying back to the
earlier discussion, the standard was impartial because it was based on a
higher standard than social conformity – the conformity to the Holy
character of God Himself.

Women also enjoyed a greater dignity under the law in Israel than in
other ANE societies. Records show that Egyptian and Babylonian women
possessed a certain degree of freedom in contrast to the rest of the
ANE[^34], but legal protection in Israel was the highest. A stark
opposite is found in the Middle-Assyrian codes, which allowed husbands
to divorce wives without cause and leave *no* provisions[^35]. The
practice of polygamy is related to this issue because the most common
reason for divorce or the taking of additional wives was due to
barrenness[^36].

The slave class of individuals was also viewed differently in the
Pentateuch, due to the unique system of “jubilee”. Hebrew slaves in
Israel were limited to a 6-year term of slavery (Exodus 21:1-4). On the
year of jubilee (every 7^th^ year), they were to be released and allowed
to go back home. A similar concept was applied to land titles, which was
also unique to Israel. The Jubilee concept, whether regarding people or
land, illustrated the same point – God owns everything. Many passages in
the Pentateuch also actively commanded against harsh treatment of slaves
and promised blessing for their well-treatment (Deuteronomy 15:1-18).
Runaway slaves warranted execution in every ANE society, *except
Israel*, where they were to be given asylum (Deuteronomy 23:15)[^37].

Thus, the view of personhood in relation both to the divine and to the
legal code varied significantly in the Pentateuch in contrast to other
ancient law codes. The laws reflected the reality that people of every
class in society possessed the dignity of being made in the image of
God. Justice was, therefore, to conform to God’s impartial standard
instead of man’s partial pragmatism.

### Legal Decision

How cases were tried in Israel also differs from other societies in the
ANE. This difference is not as vast as ones previously noted but
deserves mention in its own right. Previously discussed were the fact
that legal cases were tried by the king, the temple, and the local
elders. Israel did share this formulation, but also added a particular
nuance that is not well-documented among other societies of the era (It
may have been in practice, but there is scarce evidence of it). This
nuance is the formal structure of “judging elders” as established in
Exodus 18:17-23. The father-in-law of Moses comes to him with wise
advice to select capable men who will serve to try disputes. Of
particular note is that these men are to be qualified not simply
according to age but rather men who “fear God, trustworthy men, who hate
dishonest gain…” (Exodus 18:21). It is this particular caveat on judging
by community elders that gives Israel’s justice system a concrete
apparatus and a standard by which the elders are to be measured. As
these men must fear God, this easily connotes a standard by which they
are to adhere not only in their qualification but also in their
*administration*. It would not be out of bounds to say that this
official system of judges according to an official standard (the
*Torah*) gave Israel a much more defined and robust legal system than is
documented anywhere else in that era. Thus, Israel was given by God a
standards-based, impartial legal system which was far ahead of its time.

### Law in Covenant

This legal system established in Israel also served a much broader
purpose than simply obedience for the sake of smooth relations between
people in society. The laws in the Pentateuch were given to the nation
of Israel in the context of a *covenant relationship* with God. The
Creator’s purpose for the law was not simply obedience in a well-ordered
society but transcended that. A full-orbed view of the law was
established as it related to the covenant between God and his people.
Conformity to the law was a means of worship, of gratitude, of covenant
maintenance, and showing forth redemption. These marvelous reasons for
conformity far surpass anything even conceived of other legal documents
in the ANE. They are simply not on the radar of other cultures.

Conclusion
==========

It is this last reason that so demonstrates the wide gulf between the
legal code of Israel and the rest of the ANE. God had spoken *directly*
to his people on Mount Sinai. The origination of law had not come from
tradition but from the very mouth of God Himself. Laws were not given
for practical uses, but for *spiritual* conformity that had practical
application. All beings were made in the image of God and entitled to a
fair treatment of justice under a fair standard. Would Israel conform
itself to this wonderful legal standard? Would it demonstrate to the
pagan nations surrounding it a true and better standard of justice?
Would they adhere to the covenant and so bring God’s continued favor and
blessing on their families and fields?

We know from biblical history that ultimately Israel failed in its
mission, yet God Himself prevailed and was working through the nation to
fulfill his promise in raising up a judge who would rule with equity.

Although Israel only saw shadows at the time, the law of the Pentateuch
is the law which will swallow up all others. It is *the law*. The true
eternal king will use this law to rule His kingdom which will have no
end.

> Isaiah 9:6–7
>
> **^6 ^** For to us a child is born,
>
> to us a son is given;
>
> and the government shall be upon his shoulder,
>
> and his name shall be called
>
> Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God,
>
> Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace.
>
> **^7 ^** Of the increase of his government and of peace
>
> there will be no end,
>
> on the throne of David and over his kingdom,
>
> to establish it and to uphold it
>
> with justice and with righteousness
>
> from this time forth and forevermore.
>
> The zeal of the <span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Lord</span> of
> hosts will do this.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Boecker, Hans Jochen. *Law and the administration of justice in the Old
Testament and ancient East*. London: SPCK, 1980.

Cook, Stanley Arthur. *The laws of Moses and the code of Hammurabi*.
London: Adam and Charles Black, 1903.

Harrison, R. K. *Old Testament times*. Grand Rapids, Mich: Eerdmans,
1970.

Hays, Christopher B. *Hidden riches: a sourcebook for the comparative
study ofthe Hebrew Bible and ancient Near East*. Louisville, KY:
Westminster John Knox Press, 2014.

Matthews, Victor Harold, and Don C. Benjamin. *Old Testament parallels:
laws and stories from the ancient Near East*. Fully rev. and expanded
3rd ed. New York: Paulist Press, 2006.

Merrill, Eugene H., Mark Rooker, Michael A. Grisanti, and Edwin
Yamauchi. *The World and the Word: An Introduction to the Old
Testament*. Nashville, Tenn: B&H Academic, 2011.

Neufeld, E., ed. *The Hittite laws*. London: Luzac, 1951.

Pritchard, James B. *Ancient Near Eastern texts relating to the Old
Testament*. 3d ed., with supplement. Princeton, N.J: Princeton
University Press, 1974.

Richardson, M. E. J. *Hammurabi’s laws: text, translation and glossary*.
Biblical seminar 73. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 2000.

Snell, Daniel C., ed. *A companion to the ancient Near East*. Blackwell
companions to the ancient world. Oxford: Blackwell, 2007.

Sparks, Kenton L. *Ancient texts for the study of the Hebrew Bible: a
guideto the background literature*. Peabody, Mass: Hendrickson
Publishers, 2005.

Walton, John H. *Ancient Israelite literature in its cultural context: a
survey of parallels between biblical and ancient Near Eastern texts*.
Library of Biblical interpretation. Grand Rapids, Mich: Regency
Reference Library, 1989.

[^1]: Daniel C. Snell, ed., *A companion to the ancient Near East*,
    Blackwell companions to the ancient world (Oxford: Blackwell, 2007),
    200.

[^2]: John H. Walton, *Ancient Israelite literature in its cultural
    context: a survey of parallels between biblical and ancient Near
    Eastern texts*, Library of Biblical interpretation (Grand Rapids,
    Mich: Regency Reference Library, 1989), 69–74.

[^3]: Victor Harold Matthews and Don C. Benjamin, *Old Testament
    parallels: laws and stories from the ancient Near East*, Fully rev.
    and expanded 3rd ed. (New York: Paulist Press, 2006), 101.

[^4]: Kenton L. Sparks, *Ancient texts for the study of the Hebrew
    Bible: a guideto the background literature* (Peabody, Mass:
    Hendrickson Publishers, 2005), 420.

[^5]: Sparks, *Ancient texts for the study of the Hebrew Bible*, 421.

[^6]: Eugene H. Merrill et al., *The World and the Word: An Introduction
    to the Old Testament* (Nashville, Tenn: B&H Academic, 2011), 61.

[^7]: Christopher B. Hays, *Hidden riches: a sourcebook for the
    comparative study ofthe Hebrew Bible and ancient Near East*
    (Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox Press, 2014), 121.

[^8]: Snell, *A companion to the ancient Near East*, 201.

[^9]: James B. Pritchard, *Ancient Near Eastern texts relating to the
    Old Testament*, 3d ed., with supplement. (Princeton, N.J: Princeton
    University Press, 1974), 180.

[^10]: Sparks, *Ancient texts for the study of the Hebrew Bible*, 424.

[^11]: Sparks, *Ancient texts for the study of the Hebrew Bible*, 425.

[^12]: Pritchard, *Ancient Near Eastern texts relating to the Old
    Testament*, 185.

[^13]: E. Neufeld, ed., *The Hittite laws* (London: Luzac, 1951), 97.

[^14]: Neufeld, *The Hittite laws*, 99–102.

[^15]: Neufeld, *The Hittite laws*, 189.

[^16]: Walton, *Ancient Israelite literature in its cultural context*,
    74.

[^17]: Walton, *Ancient Israelite literature in its cultural context*,
    76.

[^18]: Hans Jochen Boecker, *Law and the administration of justice in
    the Old Testament and ancient East* (London: SPCK, 1980), 42.

[^19]: Sparks, *Ancient texts for the study of the Hebrew Bible*, 418.

[^20]: Walton, *Ancient Israelite literature in its cultural context*,
    33.

[^21]: Hays, *Hidden riches*, 143.

[^22]: Neufeld, *The Hittite laws*, 97.

[^23]: Stanley Arthur Cook, *The laws of Moses and the code of
    Hammurabi* (London: Adam and Charles Black, 1903), 61–63.

[^24]: Boecker, *Law and the administration of justice in the Old
    Testament and ancient East*, 29–30.

[^25]: Neufeld, *The Hittite laws*, 191.

[^26]: Neufeld, *The Hittite laws*, 194.

[^27]: R. K. Harrison, *Old Testament times* (Grand Rapids, Mich:
    Eerdmans, 1970), 59.

[^28]: M. E. J. Richardson, *Hammurabi’s laws: text, translation and
    glossary*, Biblical seminar 73 (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press,
    2000), 91.

[^29]: Hays, *Hidden riches*, 137–138.

[^30]: Snell, *A companion to the ancient Near East*, 201.

[^31]: Walton, *Ancient Israelite literature in its cultural context*,
    76.

[^32]: Sparks, *Ancient texts for the study of the Hebrew Bible*.

[^33]: Neufeld, *The Hittite laws*, 119.

[^34]: Snell, *A companion to the ancient Near East*, 208.

[^35]: Pritchard, *Ancient Near Eastern texts relating to the Old
    Testament*, 183.

[^36]: Cook, *The laws of Moses and the code of Hammurabi*, 111.

[^37]: Cook, *The laws of Moses and the code of Hammurabi*, 157.
