**Creating Reformed Evangelistic Tracts**

Joshua Lamb

632a: Evangelism

March 15, 2017

Introduction {#introduction-1}
============

When most people consider the topic of evangelism, they think of either
door-to-door interactions or large events geared toward reaching the
unsaved. The concept of tract evangelism is often viewed as not that
effective. Perhaps some of this criticism is for good reason as the
content of many evangelical tracts are cheesy at best and heretical at
worst. Often there is a reductionist gospel message and a quick call to
believe. However, should these aberrations deter us from what could be a
fruitful endeavor?

In reality there is much to commend tract ministry. After all, the Bible
is in writing and people have been converted by reading God’s Word. In
the Reformed tradition we celebrate preaching as the means by which God
calls His elect, and rightly so. However, we cannot dismiss that many
have been converted simply by reading God’s Word. So a careful tract
that uses Scripture effectively is like a printed preacher, ready to
tell anyone who happens to read about the Gospel of Jesus. We should not
shun this medium as a way by which God may begin to draw sinners to
Himself.

Hopefully you are beginning to sense that this is an area in which we
may yet be faithful and effective. But before jumping on the internet to
order tracts, it is important that as pastors we consider creating our
own. Our cultural context for ministry is unique. We are the ones who
know our cities and communities best. As such we have a special
opportunity to write tracts which appeal to the wills and consciences of
the people in our immediate vicinity. This paper examines the
considerations we should have as we seek to produce biblically faithful,
relevant, and engaging gospel tracts for our neighbors. We will look at
this through three angles: the Message, the Motivation, and the Method

Message - the Gospel we must bring
==================================

The first task we have in writing a solid Gospel tract is to define what
exactly Gospel content is. There are definite limits to what can be
conveyed in a short leaflet or pamphlet. Yet we should desire to remain
faithful. Knowing that tract size is limited, there are a few questions
we have to answer. What is the minimum that we can convey and still call
it a Gospel presentation? What elements elements are essential for it to
be true to Scripture. Morton Smith aptly states that the basic idea of
evangelism is setting forth the Gospel of Christ.[^1] This may seem
simplistic, but needs to be our starting point. Before anything else we
need to have as our axis that the Gospel revolves around the person and
work of Christ. If we miss this, then no matter how pretty or engaging
our handout is, it has failed the test of faithfulness. Smith goes on to
say that we essentially have to balance the issues of the sovereignty of
God and the responsibility of man in our presentation.[^2] These are two
big themes that should weave their way through our tract on some level.

Beyond that there are different gospel grids that have been developed by
faithful reformed men. We will give an overview of them here. Firstly,
there is J. I. Packer’s viewpoint. Packer identifies four necessary
components in the Gospel:[^3] 1) the gospel is about God. It is about
His position as the Creator of this world to whom man is always
accountable. 2) it is about sin. Mankind’s fall from grace in the garden
of Eden and fractured his relationship with God and through Adam the
whole race of men fell away. Every man now sins out of his nature and
only heaps more judgment on himself. 3) Christ’s work of salvation.
Christ came willingly to do what man could never do for himself. He shed
His precious blood and remitted the sins of all God has chosen. 4) call
to faith and repentance. All men everywhere are commanded to respond the
news of what Christ has done and to have faith in His work alone for
their salvation. They are to renounce underhanded and ungodly deeds and
put on Christ. Packer’s outline is comprehensive and is right to place
God at the beginning and Christ at the center of the discussion.

Secondly, J. Mack Stiles has a similar four-point outline for the Gospel
message. This can be summarized under the words God, Man, Christ, and
Response.[^4] That is, it is a message about a Creator God who made man
in His image, but man sinned against Him. God sent His Son as the
redeemer and we must respond with faith and repentance.

Thirdly, Will Metzger has a five-point presentation with similar
content.[^5] He starts with God as well, in the position of Creator and
Judge. He develops these themes in showing that man has a twofold
obligation to obey God - He made them and also rules over them. Next he
discusses the original design of mankind as God’s vice-regents on the
earth who were meant to obey the law of love towards God and neighbor.
This is what makes Metzger’s view a five-point view vs the four-point of
the men discussed above. Metzger no doubt senses the importance of
knowing where Adam could have been if he had followed God’s law. He then
returns to an outline similar to Stiles and Packer in his last two
points, one illustration Christ’s work as Savior and Lord, and the final
about the call to repent.

We see how these three men who are all faithful reformed evangelists
have exposited the Gospel in a concise manner. We can say with Pastor
David Engelsma that the heart of the Gospel is teaching men their sinful
guilt before God but also of Christ’s substitutionary atonement for sin
that their guilt would be remitted.[^6] We are then to summon them to
repentance, because God does not give the Gospel simply as a
nice-to-hear message but as something which must be obeyed. It is not a
bulletin announcement but a summons from a King.

We see again that the particular thrust of these Gospel outlines is that
they are God-centered in nature. God is both the starting point and the
focal point. They are focused on the objective realities of God’s
character, rather than the felt needs of man. There are unfortunately
many modern tracts which are unfaithful and sub par because they do not
have this emphasis.

So tying this all together we could say that the Gospel is a message
about who God is as Creator and Lord, who man is as sinner and rebel,
and what Christ has done (specifically in His shedding of blood on the
cross to atone for the transgressions of God’s elect). It is a message
which all who hear are accountable to respond to. We can easily use our
creeds, confessions, and doctrinal formulations such as TULIP to give a
full expression to this in the tracts we produce. But this is our
starting point for what must be communicated in evangelistic literature
for it to be a faithful mini-portrait of the Gospel.

Motivation - the love we must have
==================================

Next we come to the motivation we are to have for conveying the Gospel,
whether in a tract or otherwise. It should be the motivation for which
we do all things - Love! As Jesus declared, the greatest commandment is
to love God with our whole being and the second is to love our neighbor
as ourself (Matt 22:37-39). One of the chief components of love is
knowledge. A husband who does not know his wife very well is also a
husband who lacks in love towards her. This is also important for the
pastor who is producing gospel literature. We must love the people we
are trying to communicate with by getting to know them.

Knowledge we need to gather
---------------------------

There are many types of knowledge we can gain about people in the local
area. It is important to remember our advantage as a local church
pastor. We have something that a big name gospel tract publisher would
never have - the constant opportunity to interact with people in our
area. Below are several spheres of knowledge that could be helpful in
producing gospel literature.

1.  *Understand Scripture* - Before any other type of knowledge, we
    should seek to be as shaped by Scripture as possible. This is the
    one non-negotiable sphere of knowledge that we must seek after. Far
    more important than learning how to engage our pagan world is
    learning the Gospel message we are to bring to them. We are the city
    on a hill (Matt 5:14). This means that we should know the passages
    well where men preached to an unbelieving audience the way of
    salvation (Peter in Acts 3, Stephen in Acts 7, Paul in Acts 17).
    Notice how they explain the history of redemption, open up the work
    of Christ, confront men over their sin, and call for a response.
    Along with this preparation we should anticipate common questions
    that people will ask and common objections to what the Bible
    teaches.[^7]

2.  *Understand Suppositions* - We should seeks to understand both the
    religious (Islam, Jewish, Buddhist etc) and the non-religious
    (athiest, darwinistic, nihilistic, fatalistic, materialistic,
    stoic etc) makeup of our local area. What religious groups and
    societies exist where I am? What are the tenants of their religions?
    Here is where our literature can take on a more specific character
    and be geared to a particular audience. Charles Bridges
    distinguished between six kinds of unbelievers: the infidel,
    ignorant & careless, self-righteous, false professor, those under
    natural conviction, and the backslider.[^8] What category would most
    of the people in your city fall into? When we look at Scripture we
    can see that Bridges is really just picking up on the type of
    precision that the Lord Jesus Himself used when addressing the
    various types of people that came to Him. In passages such as Matt
    21, 22, 25; Luke 7, 8, 14, 15, and 19 we see Jesus giving a tailored
    response based on the heart-attitude of the person in dialogue with
    Him.[^9] Our task is harder because we cannot read hearts as Christ
    did and because we may not be their to explain our tracts to
    our readers. Nevertheless, any steps we take towards learning to
    target our reader will do us well.

3.  *Understand Socioeconomic Factors* - We should seek to understand
    the racial makeup, family structure (divorced, single, separated),
    family life (what they value, how time is spent, how money is
    spent), and income distribution of our area. These are surface
    issues but they can help us to see how the lost people in our area
    think and reason their way through life. What drives them? What
    things do they love and hate?

4.  *Local Issues/Sentiment* - What is the pulse of this area? No doubt
    there are political, economic, and other newsworthy subjects which
    are important to the people in this area. We do not have to become
    pundits or news junkies in order to have some awareness of our city.
    Lest we view this as unspiritual, we are reminded that Jesus was
    aware of events going on around Him, such as the fall of the tower
    of Siloam (Luke 13:4). A part of this should be to seek out what
    their impressions are of Christianity.

Ways to increase our knowledge about the area
---------------------------------------------

We have just outlined many types of knowledge we can gain in order to
have a better understanding of the local situation around us. Yet we
still need to discuss ways of getting this information so that we are
informed as we create our tracts.

1.  Host a summer barbecue. This would be a great way for the church to
    get to know people who are in the immediate vicinity of the church
    building and would work even if the area is economically depressed.
    It is important that this is not viewed as the next Billy Graham
    evangelistic event, but rather one link in the chain of drawing
    others to Christ. A gospel presentation could be shared, but
    without gimmicks.

2.  Run a Christianity Explored class. An evangelistic series is a great
    way to be exposed to the beliefs of local people who are also
    curious about the doctrines of the Christian faith.

3.  Prepare lessons in a local coffee shop. Many pastors report being
    approached while working on catechism lessons in coffee shops and
    similar environments. Some have taken advantage of this by purposing
    to do some of their work there and be open to any doors the Holy
    Spirit might open. This is a great way to get local sentiment
    as well.

4.  Share a hobby. Most cities have softball leagues and similar
    group activities. These are a great opportunities to get some
    exercise while forming relationships with non-believers.

5.  Hospitality. Inviting unbelievers into your home can be one of the
    most effective ways of reaching the lost around us. It is in this
    context that they see faith lived out and many of their mental myths
    begin to crumble. They could be their to witness your normal habit
    of family worship and be exposed to the Word. You can learn much
    about them as well by casually discussing matters of faith.

Method - the way we should write
================================

We have discussed the essential content of the Gospel, the knowledge we
should pursue about our area, and some ways to get that knowledge. The
final piece is to think through our method for producing tracts and
other evangelistic literature. What are our considerations when the
proverbial pen is put to paper?

Our first consideration should be *true content*. The Gospel message we
described above should be presented in a clear and concise way. It is
unfortunate that we usually not able to provide as full-orbed of a
presentation as we would like. That is the downside. Fortunately, our
new understanding of the people we are addressing means that we can
write content which is appropriate to them. We can bring the Gospel to
bear on their situation. We are not limited to only one tract. So there
should be a focus on one central point that is discussed. A provocative
and challenging question could be posed. A myth about Christianity could
be debunked. In any case, we must be true to the Gospel message in our
response. There is abundant evidence of tracts that either lost focus or
come across as gimmicky. We don’t have to trust in gimmicks to write a
tract, but can place full confidence in the Spirit who draws and in the
unbreakable Word.[^10]

The second goal should be a *careful explanation*. There exist tracts
which truly point to the Gospel, but their presentation is muddied
because of a mistaken assumption that the reader has the same vocabulary
as the writer. This is especially true of a post-modern West, in which
the cultural vocabulary for topics such as sin, judgment, atonement, and
righteousness is at an all time low. Along with this are similar
assumptions about knowledge of Bible stories, characters, and narrative.
References to Archippus, Nehemiah, and Baalam are likely unknown to most
unbelievers. Yet there are tracts which make frequent references to
places and events which only someone mature in the faith would
understand. It is important that an evangelistic tract consider the
audience and slow down when approaching weighty concepts. Another
consideration is that tracts must avoid misleading statements such as
“God loves you” and “Christ died for you”. These statements are
misleading[^11] because they make people think they are saved when they
are not. Even people associated with big-name evangelical organizations
make this mistake in their literature.[^12][^13] Only the Holy Spirit by
the Scriptures can give assurance of faith. It is dangerous to imply
that a tractwriter can pronounce this.

The third consideration is that the tract is *presentable and engaging*.
We do not have to try to sell and advertise as the world does, because
we trust in the ultimate sovereignty of God. Yet God is also the God who
made a world of order and beauty. Nothing we make should be of shoddy
craftsmanship, and how much more is that true for literature which
commends the Gospel. If illustrations are used they should be good
quality. The arrangement should be neat and presentable. Likewise the
format should be engaging. It could start with a question, a story, an
NT parable (perhaps modernized), and allegory (similar to Nathan’s
confrontation of King David) etc. Will Metzger has a collection of Bible
stories which can be used to discriminately address a certain type of
hearer.[^14] This would be useful for tracts because it can speak
directly to an individual with a certain life issue. The tract should
anticipate objections of the reader and address them.[^15] It is safe to
assume there will be objections because the Gospel is offensive to the
natural man. In all this there should be a reverence for the Scripture
that is cited in the tract. It should take prominence over the words of
men with a larger font size, bolded, different color etc.

Lastly, the tract should have a *winsome and personal tone*. It should
walk the line between being a man-fearing attempt to pander and an
overly condemning citation. We should simply engage them, teach the
Gospel, and call them to repentance and faith. There is a place to show
them the law, but remember that it is God who judges and not us. We
should close the tract on a personal note. It is appropriate to have
some place for identifying your church and how to get in touch with you.
After all, the goal should be to see this person trust in Christ and
become a member of a faithful church. Studies also reveal that most
people (80 out of 100) come to church as a result of a personal relation
or strong pastoral leadership.[^16]

Conclusion
==========

In the Reformed church we place a solid emphasis on the declaration of
the Word of God by the mouths of preachers, but it is also important
that we declare this through our pens as well. Evangelistic tracts are a
way to herald the Gospel, and the writing of them by local church
pastors are an effective means of addressing the specific situations of
the people around us. For many years the presses have been flooded with
unfaithful, Armenian, and gimmicky tracts which fail to connect the
Gospel to real people and situations. With humble meditation on the
Gospel message and a loving desire to know our neighbors, we can tell
the Gospel of our God on bus stations benches, corner stores, and
libraries. Hallelujah our God reigns!

***I certify 100% completion of the assigned readings for this
course.***

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Engelsma, David. *Evangelism and the reformed faith*. South Holland,
Ill: Evangelism Committee, South HollandProtestant Reformed Church,
1983.

Jones, Robert. *Questions answered for the seeking soul*. Shoals, IN:
Old Paths Tract Society, 2000.

Kennedy, D. James, and Archie Parrish. *Evangelism explosion*. Rev.
Wheaton, Ill: Tyndale House Publishers, 1977.

Masters, Peter. *Biblical strategies for witness*. London: Wakeman
Trust, 1994.

Metzger, Will. *Tell the truth: The whole Gospel to the whole person by
whole people: A training manual on the message and methodof God-centered
witnessing to a grace-centered Gospel*. Rev. and expanded, 3rd ed.
Downers Grove, Ill: InterVarsity Press, 2002.

Moyer, R. Larry. *21 things God never said: Correcting our
misconceptions about evangelism*. Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel Publications,
2004.

Salter, Darius. *American evangelism: Its theology and practice*. Grand
Rapids, Mich: Baker Books, 1996.

Smith, Morton H. *Reformed evangelism*. Rev. ed. \[Greenville, SC:
Greenville Presbyterian Theological Seminary\], 1994.

Stiles, J. Mack. *Evangelism: How the whole church speaks of Jesus*.
9Marks: Building healthy churches. Wheaton, Illinois: Crossway, 2014.

[^1]: . Morton H. Smith, *Reformed evangelism*, Rev. ed. (\[Greenville,
    SC: Greenville Presbyterian Theological Seminary\], 1994), 2.

[^2]: . Smith, *Reformed evangelism*, 12.

[^3]: . Smith, *Reformed evangelism*, 23–24.

[^4]: . J. Mack Stiles, *Evangelism: How the whole church speaks of
    Jesus*, 9Marks: Building healthy churches (Wheaton, Illinois:
    Crossway, 2014), 33.

[^5]: . Will Metzger, *Tell the truth: The whole Gospel to the whole
    person by whole people: A training manual on the message and
    methodof God-centered witnessing to a grace-centered Gospel*, Rev.
    and expanded, 3rd ed. (Downers Grove, Ill: InterVarsity Press,
    2002), 54.

[^6]: . David Engelsma, *Evangelism and the reformed faith* (South
    Holland, Ill: Evangelism Committee, South HollandProtestant Reformed
    Church, 1983), 10–13.

[^7]: . Peter Masters, *Biblical strategies for witness* (London:
    Wakeman Trust, 1994), 148–149.

[^8]: . Masters, *Biblical strategies for witness*, 72–73 a large part
    of this volume is dedicate to answering these various types of
    hearers and so I highly commend it for anyone in pulpit ministry to
    read.

[^9]: . Masters, *Biblical strategies for witness*, 73–75.

[^10]: . Engelsma, *Evangelism and the reformed faith*, 16.

[^11]: . Smith, *Reformed evangelism*, 20.

[^12]: . R. Larry Moyer, *21 things God never said: Correcting our
    misconceptions about evangelism* (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel
    Publications, 2004), example of an unsatisfactory tract.

[^13]: . D. James Kennedy and Archie Parrish, *Evangelism explosion*,
    Rev. (Wheaton, Ill: Tyndale House Publishers, 1977), 43–44 there are
    some helpful practical tips in this volume but I do not commend the
    gospel presentation it contains because it is too man-centered.

[^14]: . Metzger, *Tell the truth*, Appendix IV, I would commend Metzger
    as the single best volume to read on evangelism.

[^15]: . Robert Jones, *Questions answered for the seeking soul*
    (Shoals, IN: Old Paths Tract Society, 2000), 8, this volume contains
    a great collection of God-centered tracts.

[^16]: . Darius Salter, *American evangelism: Its theology and practice*
    (Grand Rapids, Mich: Baker Books, 1996), 363.
