Puritan Reformed Theological Seminary

**Edwards and Bunyan on Conversion in the Ordo Salutis**

Joshua Lamb

415: Systematic Theology V: Soteriology

April 7, 2016

Introduction
============

The topic of conversion is one that has been hotly debated over the
centuries between various Christian groups. How one views conversion is
directly related to the evangelistic methods that preachers and lay
people use as they encounter people in daily life. It is at this point
in the Ordo Salutis that there is human agency and involvement.
Arminians believe this is the key time that people must ‘make a
decision’ for Christ, while Calvinists believe this is the time at which
the means of grace are used by God to call the sinner to faith and
repentance. This paper seeks to examine the Calvinist viewpoint of
conversion from the perspectives of two Puritan pastors and writers –
John Bunyan and Jonathan Edwards. Although from two different time
periods, these men shared many similar convictions. Their varying styles
help us today to examine how we view conversion and the role of a pastor
in it. Their material will be examined along the lines of encouragements
& warnings to respond to the Gospel, hindrances from responding,
certainty & steps to conversion, marks of conversion, and how ministers
can counsel during conversion.

Conversion is the point in the Ordo Salutis at which the sinner turns in
repentance and faith to trust in Christ. It is when all the saving
benefits of salvation are applied individually to the soul of a sinner
and he enters fully into the kingdom of God. It is chronologically at
the same moment as justification, but logically precedes it. For some,
this key moment of trusting in Christ was a decisive and marked event,
but for others it is best viewed in retrospect. They were in the way of
salvation, perhaps listening to sermons and praying, and then looking
back there was a period of time during which they trusted in Christ.
Conversion is always a pinpoint moment in time, but the Christian may
not be aware of this in their experience.

There are similarities and differences between Jonathan Edwards and John
Bunyan that are worth noting. Both men were considered excellent
preachers. John Bunyan was envied by his contemporary John Owen as
having a particular gift for preaching, although Owen himself was an
extremely capable theologian. Jonathan Edwards was preaching during the
revival period in North America and saw spectacular conversions under
his ministry, particularly in Northampton, Massachusetts between
1734-1735. However, how they went about preaching to lost sinners was
quite different. It is clear from reading any one of Edwards’ sermons
that he was masterful at the use of searching and piercing questions
directed at the consciences of men. While Bunyan did address this, it
was not on the ‘interrogative’ level of Edwards. Bunyan seemed to be
more of an encourager, pointing people to the warmth and readiness of
Christ to receive needy sinners. Although a bit over simplistic, another
way to say it is that Bunyan welcomed sinners to heaven, while Edwards
terrified them of hell. In some respects, this is really two sides of
the same coin, and both men shared a loving and evangelistic heart
towards the lost world around them. The tendency of secular history has
been to label Edwards as hateful, but this is an unfair caricature of a
man that was deeply concerned with the salvation of the lost. Edwards
loved people enough to warn them of the truth of hell. Edwards was fiery
when describing hell, but would switch to a warm and devotional tone
when describing the sufficiency and capability of Christ to receive
sinners. It is also worth recognizing that the works we have available
of both men tend to paint a certain picture: we have a vast array of
Edwards’ works, but a corresponding lack of Bunyan’s sermons. Thus, it
is easy to paint a picture of Edwards as the fiery preacher, and Bunyan
as the warm devotionalist.

Encouragements & Warnings to Respond to the Gospel
==================================================

Both Edwards and Bunyan were trained in the Puritan school of thought.
Their works evidently show a thorough and logical reasoning throughout.
There are striking similarities in the logical flow and structure of a
Bunyan book and an Edwards sermon. They would list the doctrine and then
give a reasoned account of each topic and subtopic in orderly
succession. As a result, their warnings for men to repent strike to the
very heart of man in a clear, direct, and succinct way.

### Edwards’ View

Edwards believed that in large part, men are in a natural state of
stupor and must be roused with warnings from the Word of God that they
are to seek conversion and reconciliation with God. Edwards stated, “Men
under the gospel almost universally think they shall not go to hell: If
it were otherwise, they could have no peace or comfort in the
world”[^1]. He lists numerous reasons throughout his sermons for why men
are to repent:

1\. The Spirit of God will not always strive with man[^2]. Edwards
demonstrated that the Gospel offer is an open door, but there is a
limited time in which men have to enter it before it slams shut. The
offer of salvation is not held out forever[^3]. Now is the day of
salvation and the favorable time. Most, if not all, of his sermons
stressed a clear urgency in responding to the gospel call. Perhaps this
would be the last time to hear the gospel they ever had. Edwards had no
qualms about showing men that if they would not repent under his
preaching, he would be in the position to condemn them at the judgment.
Bunyan also stressed this in his exposition of Christ’s parable of the
barren fig tree. He stated that a time would come when Christ will no
longer speak ‘one syllable more’ in defense of the unregenerate[^4].

2\. Those that refuse to come will sink into eternal death[^5]. Edwards
well-known sermon *Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God* illustrates his
fearlessness in discussing the horrors of hell. Throughout many of his
sermons are illustrative references and descriptions of hell. He spared
no pains in warning men that a refusal to repent and be converted to
Christ would not ‘probably’ but *definitely* result in eternal
damnation. He stated that, “Impenitent sinners, while in this world,
hear how dreadful hell is. But they will not believe that it is so
dreadful as ministers represent.”[^6] He tried to graphically press the
image of hell to the forefront of their imaginations and consciences.
Edwards did not believe a minister could go too far in his descriptions
of hell because he believed it was impossible for mortal man to
over-imagine its horrors.

3\. Eternal life is desirable beyond measure. Although famous for warning
against hell, Edwards did not leave people without descriptions and
exhortations toward the glories of heaven. In his own words,

> “Eternal life is a thing so desirable, that the least hopes of
> obtaining it, outweighs all the difficulty of seeking of it. I speak
> now of the positive part of salvation, of that positive happiness
> which those that are saved will enjoy if there were no hell; yet
> eternal happiness is so great a thing that it would be worth the while
> to do or undergo anything in this world, if there was the least hope
> of obtaining it. If there were no heaven, hell is so dreadful that it
> would be worth the while to use all possible means for a possibility
> of escaping it.”[^7]

### Bunyan’s View

As discussed in the introduction, the works we have of Bunyan are as a
whole more encouraging and hortatory. However, Bunyan was not shy to
warn people of the terrors of hell either.

1\. Those that lose their soul will be swallowed up in misery[^8]. Bunyan
states that the misery of a sinner is no general misery, but “all the
fearful miseries that a Holy, Just, and Eternal God can inflict”.
Additionally, these miseries will last forever[^9]. Their misery will be
multiplied by the knowledge that each new day will only bring more
misery, with no hope of relief. Bunyan warned the unregenerate that in
hell they would have many cries over their former life and the regret of
being in wicked pomp during their life, only to have such a miserable
fate in the end[^10].

2\. The loss of the soul is the greatest loss imaginable. Bunyan devoted
the better part of an entire work to showing the eternal value of even
one human soul. He said, “there is not anything, nor all things under
heaven, were they all in one man’s hand, and all at his disposal, that
would go in exchange for the soul, that would be of value to fetch back
one lost soul, or that would certainly recover it from the confines of
hell.”[^11] We could *never* get enough money to buy our soul back from
death. It is truly priceless, which drives us to consider reconciliation
to Christ at the present time.

3\. The worst sinners have been saved[^12]. In *The Jerusalem Sinner
Saved*, Bunyan goes to great lengths to show that Christ saves the
vilest of men on this earth, and so there is no reason why men who
consider themselves evil cannot be saved as well. If the thief on the
cross, and the Pharisee Nicodemus, and the Jerusalem sinners at
Pentecost were saved, the door is truly open to all that would come. He
also showed that God is glorified at the repentance of the backslidden
and the vile. David, Lot, Manasseh, and many others in Scripture,
demonstrate that God’s power is evident in saving those who have
fallen[^13]. In *Come and Welcome to Jesus Christ*, he showed that
Christ is willing, but the ultimate hope is not in His willingness, but
in His *ability*[^14]. It is here that all who would come to Christ find
their safety.

Hindrances to Responding to the Gospel
======================================

Both men were keen students of human nature, and understood well that
mere encouragements to heaven made no difference to a deadened soul.
People cannot be *informed into* heaven. While only the Holy Spirit has
the power to truly regenerate a dead sinner, Bunyan and Edwards
recognized the role of preaching in stirring men’s consciences. They
were experts at targeting specific reasons why men thought they could
remain comfortable in their sinnership. In this portion we will examine
together the hindrances listed by both men:

1\. Men think heaven isn’t real[^15]. Edwards in particular, was very
understanding that men are so prone to slumber in their soul that they
could hear preaching week after week and be completely unaffected. Some
part of them believed that heaven was an imagination dreamed up by
religious men and had no real bearing on their lives. Related to this,
Bunyan knew that some men believed heaven was real *in theory* but it
was not of such as concern to them that they would do anything to revise
their lives based on it. They thought that by addressing worldly
concerns in this life they were taking care of their needs and doing
alright for themselves[^16].

2\. Men think death is far off[^17]. Edwards would particularly press a
group of people in his sermons that acknowledged the ‘distant’ reality
of hell. These people believed that since the door of salvation was open
for their entire lives up to this point, that it would continue to be
so. They could simply repent later, after living a vain and carnal
lifestyle. Perhaps when they were older and sickly they could give their
lives to the service of religion. Bunyan also addressed this group that
would defer coming or never come at all. Edwards puts it clearly and
directly when he says, “Hell is full of good intenders who never proved
to be true performers”[^18]

3\. Some suppose they live moral lives[^19]. Another key group that
Edwards refuted were those that believed that their good works or
outward behavior meant that they would have favor with God at the
judgment. This is the heart of the Pharisee in Luke 18:9-11. Neither
church attendance, a religious pedigree, or good deeds in society are
tokens of righteous standing before God. Bunyan allegorized in *The Life
and Death of Mr. Badman* that some who are even outwardly vile could
reform their lives for a while[^20]. They can make an outward profession
and promise to amend their ways. Even their own family and church
community can be fooled for a while into thinking they have truly been
converted. But for both the outward Pharisee and the drunkard who
attempts to reform his life, the morality of one’s life is no indication
of true saving faith. Edwards showed that the heart is so desperately
deceitful that men can even *fool their own soul* to believe they have
been converted[^21].

4\. Some men are fatalistic. There are those who believe that if God
elects whom He will, that there is no reason to be concerned with
matters of religion until he sovereignly acts in their life (how much of
that thinking is prevalent today!)[^22]. Edwards showed this group that
this was not biblical thinking, but rather an attitude that could have
someone walking straight into hell when the offer of salvation is open
to them. He knew that there were those men who also actively strove
against God because of this. They hated a God who would elect and choose
men for salvation[^23]. Whether the attitude is a passive sitting back,
or an active hatred, it leads to the same place.

5\. Some men fear being a laughingstock. Not only is the cost of
following Christ a high one, but the aspect of being crucified to the
world means by necessity that there will be opposition. Edwards cited
Noah as an example of a man that was despised and mocked at by the world
for taking 120 years to build an ark, when there was no rain[^24]. There
are those that are so cowardly in their sin that they would not come to
Christ for fear of what other men may think in their neighborhood and
workplace.

6\. Men love their sins. Both Edwards and Bunyan knew that the ultimate
reason that sinners would not repent and go through true conversion is
because they loved their sins too much[^25]. Men love the dark rather
than the light (John 3:19). Even consciously knowing the horrific end to
such a life would not prevent them from continuing in their present sin
and reveling in hatred, lusts, envy, and all forms of malicious sin.

Certainty of and Steps to Conversion
====================================

Although there are many barriers to conversion, both Bunyan and Edwards
urged people from all walks of life to seek salvation. There is no
hindrance that cannot be overcome by God’s grace. He can turn the
mountain into a plain. Both men repeatedly expressed the certain and
sure hope of salvation that can be found in Jesus Christ. Though the
labor over salvation is hard, those who seek it *will find it*[^26]
(Jeremiah 29:13). Bunyan especially stressed the “shall come” aspect of
the promise of salvation in *Come and Welcome to Jesus Christ*. He
showed that this promise does not have any conditions, like some do in
Scripture[^27]. It is an *absolute* promise that is certain to occur.
For the promise to fail would mean that God is a liar with no power to
make good on His promises. It would also mean that Christ’s death was in
vain, because He came to claim the church for Himself and is entitled to
His full reward. Thus, men and women in every socioeconomic situation
could be encouraged to flee to Christ wholeheartedly. They were
admonished not to look back, as Lot’s wife did, and remain in the city
of destruction[^28]. Both Bunyan and Edwards had “run to Christ” stamped
on their lips.

We now turn to discuss the steps to conversion. The era that Edwards
grew up in was marked by an understanding of ‘preparationism’ as
espoused by Thomas Hooker and others[^29]. Under this schema, there were
certain steps the sinner must undertake to prepare himself for grace.
While this was touted as different from the Roman Catholic system, there
is a similar flawed practical understanding of salvation.
Preparationists would say that salvation is still by grace alone through
faith alone. However, the key component of preparationism is that you
must be broken and contrite. It is this humiliation which you must
pursue as you seek salvation. While it is true that a broken and
contrite heart God does not despise, are we ever really contrite enough
over our sin? Edwards had a different viewpoint, which could be referred
to as ‘moderate preparationism’. Edwards believed it was God’s normal
means to convict someone of sin before coming to show mercy to them. It
wasn’t that the sinner *stirred up* a broken spirit to approach God, but
rather that God *made* the sinner broken. He said the threefold work of
the Holy Ghost was to convince men of sin, righteousness, and
judgment[^30]. Thus, the Holy Ghost was a vital part of conversion
because He convicted men and caused them to respond in faith. Bunyan
showed that faith was a coming to Christ by moving the mind towards Him,
while having a sense of the absolute lack that man has to justify
himself[^31]. As Jonathan Edwards understood it, the normal steps of
conversion were: preaching of the Word, conviction, humiliation, faith,
and evidence[^32].

Marks of True Conversion
========================

One of the hallmarks of good preaching is that it recognizes the
different groups of people being addressed. This is referred to as
‘discriminatory’ preaching. Edwards and Bunyan understood that there are
those unregenerate in a congregation that should hear the alarm warning
them of hell, and there are those believers who should be comforted with
the Gospel and encouraged to press on in the way of salvation. In their
works they addressed what the marks of genuine conversion looked like,
that men would be stirred up to examine themselves by it and so find
comfort and assurance that they were savingly converted to Christ. These
marks are as follows:

1\. Believers sense they deserve hell. Edwards showed that true believers
have a sense that they are unworthy for salvation because they were
enemies to God and to His kingdom. They are struck by the “…conviction
of sinfulness of heart and practice, and of the dreadfulness of sin, as
committed against a God of terrible majesty, infinite holiness and
hatred of sin.”[^33] One of the statements that Edwards wished he could
repeat often and widely was that *God is not obliged* to rescue
sinners[^34]. It was common in his day, and in our own day, to make the
wrong assumption that because salvation is offered it means that God
owes it to all mankind. This is patently false. God owes nothing to
mankind in general, but much less since man has fallen into a state of
sin and misery. It is the work of the Holy Spirit to show men that they
are deserving of hell and undeserving of mercy, and He leads the elect
into a state of contrition. Bunyan noted 5 signs of a contrite heart: it
is sorrowful, humble, poor in spirit, crying out, and trembles at God’s
Word[^35]. The presence of this activity in the human heart was a mark
that someone was coming to saving conviction. Edwards showed that
contrite sinners we also aware of the fact they were helpless to deliver
themselves from the punishment of breaking God’s law[^36]. It wasn’t
enough to simply be sorrowful but to look for the remedy. This is the
intertwining relationship between repentance and faith. Repentance is
the contrite sorrow over transgression, and faith is the look outward
for the remedy in Christ.

2\. Believers are willing to part with everything. One of the hindrances
for conversion listed above was the natural man’s propensity to love his
sin. He is not willing to part with it because he enjoys giving into
baseless carnality and to accumulating riches and a name for himself.
But a mark of true conversion is a willingness to give all to Christ.
Edwards says this is not a once-for-all decision but an ongoing
recognition that the sinner is dead to the world and alive in Christ. He
gleefully accepts even the plundering of his property, knowing that he
has a better possession in Christ (Hebrews 10:34).

3\. Works according to the fruit of the Spirit. Edwards was a strong
proponent that works were a very big evidence of conversion. We are His
workmanship and created for good works (Ephesians 2:10). People can be
fooled for a time, so it is important to look at someone’s whole life
over the course of years and observe if there is fruit of the Spirit.
However, just because there are falsifications of something does not
negate the genuine thing. As Edwards stated, “Works are the true test,
the surest overt sign of justification. Works might not actually *bring*
justification, but works would *inevitably* *accompany*
justification.”[^37] In writings such as *Charity and its Fruits*,
Edwards shows a heart both for the lost and for the downtrodden in
society. He said that there should be two main fruits in the life of a
Christian: respect for God and charity towards fellow man, especially
the poor[^38].

Bunyan helps to distinguish between false ‘good works’ and true works
which are borne out of genuine conversion. He claimed that in fact that
natural man has not done a *single* good work in his lifetime, because
true good works come from faith[^39]. He defined several things that
faith causes in the life of a believer: belief in the Word, trusting
God’s promise to help, seeing love in the heart of Christ, ability to
wait upon God, comfort in the midst of fears, give sweetness under
affliction, making burdens light, helping us when we are down, bringing
us near to God when we are far, declaring us friends of God, putting us
under grace, purifying our hearts, and *making our works acceptable* to
God etc…[^40]

4\. They have true contentment. Edwards rightly believed that natural man
is by nature discontent. Without Christ, man is missing the entire
connection that he was made to have with God, and as a result must seek
after this attachment by his worldly pursuits and idols[^41]. They are
also without any advocate that would give to them contentment and peace.
Bunyan remarked that not only was Christ the worthy advocate for
believers, but He was ‘pro-bono’[^42]. His advocacy is free to all those
who belong to Him. He is like a lawyer for the poorest of sinners that
cannot afford to pay for one to plead their case.

5\. They know God’s love. Bunyan devoted many pages to showing the
richness of love that was available to believers in Christ. He attempted
to explore with the saints the breadth and length and height and depth
of God’s love (Ephesians 3:18). He stated of the love of God, “This is
the Christian’s Rehoboth, that well for which the Philistines have no
heart to strive, and that which will cause that we be fruitful in the
land.”[^43]

Both men recognized that salvation was a constant undertaking in the
life of the believer. Even though Edwards was known for his preaching
which targeted the unconverted, there are many times that he presses
believers to continue seeking God[^44]. This pursuit was to be the
constant endeavor throughout all of life.

Counsel of Ministers in Conversion
==================================

We have set forth the encouragements, hindrances, steps, and marks of
true conversion, and thus turn to counsel that can be given to those who
are ‘on the edge’ of saving faith. This counsel was given by Edwards and
Bunyan directly towards those who had yet to close with Christ, and is
especially useful for the contemporary minister who is counselling a
member of the congregation who is unsure of their standing before God.
What follows are encouragements that congregants can apply to
themselves, or pastors can apply in a counseling environment:

1\. Sinners should use all means available. While Edwards was a true
Calvinist, he did not believe that men should sit idly by and wait for a
lightning bolt from heaven. He counseled that men should “Neglect no
religious duty; neglect not prayer; neglect not reading; don’t neglect a
serious and careful attendance on the public worship…”[^45]. This is a
concept referred to as putting oneself ‘in the way’ of salvation.
Although it is God who justifies, He has appointed means by which He
ordinarily saves sinners, and it would be folly to not stand in the road
of salvation and to seek after God with a whole heart[^46]. There were
10 means that Edwards listed for sinners attempting to close with
Christ: abstaining outward gratifications of lusts, keeping out of the
way of temptation, performing outward moral deeds, searching the
Scriptures, attending all ordinances, speaking of religion, controlling
their thoughts, setting apart time to seek God, improving divine
assistance, and using all their strength[^47]. Bunyan affirmed that the
sinner should *strive* in avoiding sin, believing the Gospel, and
praying fervently[^48]. Both men affirmed that there should be this
posture to lean in and seek for salvation with all might.

2\. Do not lose heart. There are many who for a season come under
conviction of sin and are severely aware of the wrath of God that lies
over their head. They may make outward moral professions and attempt to
reform their life. They may even attempt to half-heartedly seek God for
a period of time. But Edwards and Bunyan were both concerned with making
sure that sinners actually closed with Christ in saving faith. There is
a danger in losing conviction of sin after it has come upon someone and
they have done nothing about it. Many start at the beginning of the
race, but in the end don’t finish it[^49]. Bunyan so wonderfully
compares the mind of the unsaved and the saved when he says, “Reason
will say, Then who will profess Christ that hath such coarse
entertainment at the beginning? But faith will say, Then surely the
things that are at the end of a Christian’s race in this world must
needs be unspeakably glorious; since whoever hath had but the knowledge
and due consideration of them, have not stuck to run hazards, hazards of
every kind, that they might embrace and enjoy them.” [^50]

3\. Ask probing questions. Edwards is a particularly good example of a
minister that probes deep into the human heart with the use of
interrogative questions[^51]. It is the duty of the minister who is
counseling someone to not be content with skating over the surface of
heart issues, but to explore deeply with them how they have broken God’s
law. People truly are content in their sin and must be cut to the heart.
While only the Holy Spirit has power, He does use the means of preaching
and counseling to strip men of their deceitful beliefs.

4\. Point the faithful to assurance. Not all who come into the
counselling room are false believers. In fact, the willingness to come
to counselling and the struggle over conviction are often strong
indications that someone is being broken down by the Holy Spirit as a
part of their conversion. While the minister cannot truly see into the
heart and pronounce someone saved, he can point them to places in
Scripture where they may find this assurance. And they can be told that
there *is such a thing* as assurance of faith. Bunyan reminds us that
Christ will never cast out those who come to Him. If they truly belong
to Him, for them to be thrown away would invalidate His promise and make
Him a liar, which cannot be[^52].

Conclusion
==========

Both John Bunyan and Jonathan Edwards remind us that the heart of
conversion is the repentance and faith of a poor, broken, and needy
sinner. It is not the Pharisee that went home justified, but the
Publican (Luke 18:14). Christ came to call not the righteous, but
sinners, to repentance (Luke 5:32). Men must be stripped of their false
ideas that they can get to heaven on their own. They must be urgently
pressed that now is the favorable time of salvation. They must be shown
the value of their own soul and the tragic loss they will occur for
eternity without Christ. The joys of heaven and the love of God to
receive sinners must be proclaimed to them. And if they indeed come to
saving faith they must be assured that their conversion was genuine, to
press on in the faith of God so that they would win the prize of the
upward call of God in Christ (Philippians 3:14).

> “Then he called for a light, and sprang in, and came trembling, and
> fell down before Paul and Silas, And brought them out, and said, Sirs,
> what must I do to be saved? And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus
> Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house.”

(Acts 16:29–31)

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Beeke, Joel R., and Paul M. Smalley. *Prepared by Grace, for Grace: The
Puritans on God’s Way of Leading Sinners to Christ*. Grand Rapids,
Michigan: Reformation Heritage Books, 2013.

Bunyan, John. *Works of John Bunyan*. Edited by George Offor. New Ed
edition. Edinburgh; Carlisle, Pa.: Banner of Truth, 1991.

Carrick, John. *The Preaching of Jonathan Edwards*. Edinburgh, UK;
Carlisle, PA: Banner of Truth, 2008.

Edwards, Jonathan, and Don Kistler. *Pressing into the Kingdom: Jonathan
Edwards on Seeking Salvation*. Morgan, PA: Soli Deo Gloria Pubns, 1998.

Edwards, Jonathan. *Seeking God*. Edited by William Nichols.
International Outreach, Inc., 2001.

Henard, William David. “Waiting on God: The doctrine of seeking in
Jonathan Edwards’s conversion theology,” 2009.

Story, Ronald. *Jonathan Edwards and the Gospel of Love*. Amherst:
University of Massachusetts Press, 2012.

[^1]: Jonathan Edwards, *Seeking God*, ed by. William Nichols
    (International Outreach, Inc., 2001), 15.

[^2]: Edwards, *Seeking God*, 233.

[^3]: Edwards, *Seeking God*, 314.

[^4]: John Bunyan, *Works of John Bunyan*, ed by. George Offor, New Ed
    edition. (Edinburgh; Carlisle, Pa.: Banner of Truth, 1991), 3:584.

[^5]: Edwards, *Seeking God*, 133–37.

[^6]: Edwards, *Seeking God*, 128.

[^7]: Edwards, *Seeking God*, 253.

[^8]: Bunyan, *Works of John Bunyan*, 1:123.

[^9]: Bunyan, *Works of John Bunyan*, 1:125.

[^10]: Bunyan, *Works of John Bunyan*, 3:686.

[^11]: Bunyan, *Works of John Bunyan*, 1:107.

[^12]: Bunyan, *Works of John Bunyan*, 1:71.

[^13]: Bunyan, *Works of John Bunyan*, 1:75–76.

[^14]: Bunyan, *Works of John Bunyan*, 1:211.

[^15]: Edwards, *Seeking God*, 8.

[^16]: Bunyan, *Works of John Bunyan*, 2:126.

[^17]: Edwards, *Seeking God*, 9.

[^18]: Edwards, *Seeking God*, 11.

[^19]: Edwards, *Seeking God*, 10, 389.

[^20]: Bunyan, *Works of John Bunyan*, 3:650.

[^21]: Edwards, *Seeking God*, 11.

[^22]: Edwards, *Seeking God*, 245.

[^23]: Edwards, *Seeking God*, 249.

[^24]: Edwards, *Seeking God*, 220.

[^25]: Bunyan, *Works of John Bunyan*, 1:383.

[^26]: Edwards, *Seeking God*, 31.

[^27]: Bunyan, *Works of John Bunyan*, 1:254–255.

[^28]: Jonathan Edwards and Don Kistler, *Pressing into the Kingdom:
    Jonathan Edwards on Seeking Salvation* (Morgan, PA: Soli Deo Gloria
    Pubns, 1998), 132–133.

[^29]: John Carrick, *The Preaching of Jonathan Edwards* (Edinburgh, UK;
    Carlisle, PA: Banner of Truth, 2008), 79–80.

[^30]: Joel R. Beeke and Paul M. Smalley, *Prepared by Grace, for Grace:
    The Puritans on God’s Way of Leading Sinners to Christ* (Grand
    Rapids, Michigan: Reformation Heritage Books, 2013), 204–205.

[^31]: Bunyan, *Works of John Bunyan*, 1:247.

[^32]: William David Henard, “Waiting on God: The doctrine of seeking in
    Jonathan Edwards’s conversion theology,” 2009, 168–175.

[^33]: Beeke and Smalley, *Prepared by Grace, for Grace*, 221.

[^34]: Edwards, *Seeking God*, 63.

[^35]: Bunyan, *Works of John Bunyan*, 3:696–702.

[^36]: Edwards, *Seeking God*, 261.

[^37]: Ronald Story, *Jonathan Edwards and the Gospel of Love* (Amherst:
    University of Massachusetts Press, 2012), 53.

[^38]: Story, *Jonathan Edwards and the Gospel of Love*, 53–54.

[^39]: Bunyan, *Works of John Bunyan*, 2:550–551.

[^40]: Bunyan, *Works of John Bunyan*, 1:293–294.

[^41]: Edwards, *Seeking God*, 437.

[^42]: Bunyan, *Works of John Bunyan*, 1:190.

[^43]: Bunyan, *Works of John Bunyan*, 2:34.

[^44]: Carrick, *The Preaching of Jonathan Edwards*, 92.

[^45]: Edwards, *Seeking God*, 254.

[^46]: Carrick, *The Preaching of Jonathan Edwards*, 89.

[^47]: Carrick, *The Preaching of Jonathan Edwards*, 89.

[^48]: Bunyan, *Works of John Bunyan*, 1:369.

[^49]: Carrick, *The Preaching of Jonathan Edwards*, 179–180.

[^50]: Bunyan, *Works of John Bunyan*, 1:106.

[^51]: Carrick, *The Preaching of Jonathan Edwards*, 309.

[^52]: Bunyan, *Works of John Bunyan*, 1:290.
