Puritan Reformed Theological Seminary

**George Gillespie’s View of Church and State**

Joshua Lamb

411: Systematic Theology 1: Prolegomena

December 8, 2016

Introduction
============

The questions regarding the boundaries between the church and state
remain perennial in every age. Men have vehemently disagreed over how
these two institutions should operate and effect men’s lives. Does the
church have the power to inflict bodily punishment? Does the state have
the power to call church councils? What happens when a high-ranking
member of one institution also wields power in another? George Gillespie
(one of the youngest ranking members of the Westminster Assembly) wrote
extensively on this topic. He argued that the Church and the State are
separate institutions which are both ordained by God to operate in
different spheres of society. His distinctions help to clarify for us
the ways in which we must think of Civil and Ecclesiastical authorities
and their exercise of power in society. We will examine what functions
each institution performs, ways in which they benefit each other, common
errors, the similarities and differences in each institution, and how
Gillespie’s thinking should influence us in the church today.

It is important to understand the context of Gillespie’s day. He was
concerned with the influences of Erastianism (the belief that the state
has power over religious affairs). His most well-known work *Aaron’s Rod
Blossoming*, is his defense of ecclesiastical government. He establishes
that there was a distinction between church and state authorities in the
OT and must also be so now[^1]. His comprehensive work *CXI propositions
concerning the ministerie and government of the Church* is also a
valuable treatise in which he argues that the ecclesiastical and civil
governments are distinct and should not be mixed together[^2]. Rev.
W.D.J. McKay further supports this in his statement, “Gillespie asserts
that church and state are separate, coordinate powers which are
sovereign within their own spheres”[^3].

Overall Functions of the Church
===============================

Gillespie was very adept at citing and interpreting Scriptural commands
which bear tremendous weight in the defense of ecclesiastical
government. He proves against the Erastians that the church is a
separate institution which has goals and means which are (and should be)
distinct from that of the civil government. He lists preaching,
sacraments, public prayer, catechizing, examination of communion,
deciding controversies of faith, etc. as belonging uniquely to the
church[^4]. No doubt Gillespie would agree these responsibilities all
stem from the church as the standard-bearer and keeper of Scripture
(Romans 3:2).

He believed that the church had a threefold delineation of
responsibility and illustrated this using the “keys” example, which is a
reference to the keys of the kingdom (Matthew 16:19). The first of these
responsibilities is that of *dogmatike* – the key of knowledge or
doctrine[^5]. This refers to the fact that church is responsible to be
the pillar and ground of the truth. In a sense, it means that men should
be able to go to God’s people and hear the voice of God in His Word. The
church government should be an outlet for the truth of God upon the
world. The second key is *diaktike* – of order and decency. Gillespie
expresses here the use of sound judgment by church officers in matters
which the Bible may not be totally clear. Lastly is the key of *kritike*
– church discipline. This is the power that the church to administer
censures and excommunication if it is necessary. In the articulation of
these examples, we can see that the church has a distinctly different
mission and responsibilities from that of a civil government. Gillespie
goes on to show that the church has a far loftier goal of the
advancement of the kingdom of heaven and the Glory of God. It is a
substantively greater mission to administer affairs for the kingdom of
God than the kingdom of men. The awesome responsibility and the need for
humility is certainly something that should be felt by officers in
Christ’s church.

Overall Functions of the State
==============================

The civil government, by contrast has a much smaller mission than the
church. However, that does not mean that civil government does not
deserve to be a distinct institution. Gillespie rooted the justification
for the magistrate in the fact that Christ has a “two-fold kingdom”.
Christ is both the Lord of *all* creation and the Mediator of His
church[^6]. Gillespie believed that the existence of the magistrate
which has authority over all, and the church which has authority over
some, both have their foundation in an aspect of Christ’s kingship.

Gillespie believed the magistrate had the responsibility to protect and
provide for the commonwealth. This entailed ensuring that men are
punished for the crimes that they commit in the body. Although Gillespie
viewed the church’s responsibility with higher reverence and closer
relationship to God, he did not believe that the civil government should
operate in a secular manner. He believed, along with many of the
Westminster divines, that the state was to have the role of “protector
of the true religion”. In other words, the functions of the state were
tied to assisting the functions of the church.

To this end, Gillespie did allow for (by modern standards) some
intrusion by the state into the affairs of the church. Propositions
50-51 of his *111 propositions* outline the responsibility of the
magistrate to establish guidelines for synodical meetings[^7]. He
caveated this by saying that it should be done in the same manner as any
other gathering. It is a good clarification because his statement could
otherwise have been interpreted for allowing the civil government to
dictate matters of religion.

The Role of the Church in Discipline
====================================

The role of the church in discipline is distinct from that of the civil
government, but it is no less important. Gillespie’s strongest reference
to the “keys of the kingdom” concept is when he discusses church
discipline. This should come as no surprise, considering biblically the
“keys” appear within the context of church discipline in Matthew 16. The
keys are not given to private individuals but to the church,
particularly the officers[^8]. He divides the responsibilities of elders
into that of *doctrine* and that of *discipline*. Gillespie separates
doctrine out as uniquely belonging to the pastor. He is the one gifted
and called by God as the one who teaches and guides the church in a
special way[^9]. It is important to note that Gillespie makes an
association between preaching and church discipline which should not be
passed over. If we consider the “gradation” of church discipline, we see
preaching, then censures, then finally excommunication. Preaching has a
place in this sequence. It is one of the mechanisms by which the kingdom
of heaven is shut to unbelievers and opened to believers. Perhaps not
many in our day think of preaching as a means of church discipline, but
Gillespie connects these dots.

Unlike the civil government, the church is responsible for discipline in
the inward man only. Gillespie did not believe the church could mandate
prison sentences or the like, but rather its punishment consisted in
spiritual censure. As such, the ‘ultimate termination’ of ecclesiastical
power in Gillespie’s mind, was excommunication[^10]. He stated that
excommunication was the “last remedy for the curing of the most deadly
and desperate evils”[^11]. The Scottish divines particularly received
flak for being focused on church censures[^12]. However, we know from
the Westminster Standards and other writings that it was not something
they viewed lightly and that they were not as singular about the issue
as some imagine. They cared deeply for the church and knew that church
punishments should be motivated by love and a desire to win souls back
to Christ. Gillespie and others believed that church members should be
equally exposed to church discipline. There should be no one who,
because of rank or privilege, is treated differently than anyone
else[^13]. He also believed that the power of the keys was not given to
the whole church but to the church officers, acting on behalf of the
congregation[^14].

The Role of the State in Discipline
===================================

Gillespie’s focus in his treatises was on the distinction between church
and state and the argument for the independence of the ecclesiastical
government of the church. Due to this, he did not pay as much attention
to delineating the prescriptions and limits of the state’s power to
discipline. However, he did give some general direction.

His belief was that the state should punish offenders that broke
biblical laws, whether in the Old Testament or the New Testament.
Regarding the Old Testament, his basic hermeneutic was if the law was
not restricted to national Israel, then they should apply in
contemporary culture as well[^15]. He referenced that Christ came to
fulfill the law, not abolish it (Matthew 5:17). By contemporary
standards, it may seem strange that the state would prosecute someone
for witchcraft or blasphemy. However, in Gillespie’s mind, if the state
was to be the protector of true religion and the church’s sole
punishment was censorship, it remained to the state to give sentences
that effected one’s person and property.

Mutual Provisions of the Church and State
=========================================

Gillespie viewed these separate institutions of civil and ecclesiastical
as being mutually beneficial towards one another. Although they were
separate, they should in theory be friends. Both the magistrate and the
church were to take their authority and direction from Christ. The
church provided for the state by *strengthening consciences* of
men[^16]. The work of church consistories in visitation and in
admonition surely helps to prevent men from engaging in things which the
civil government deems unlawful. The church also provides for the state
in its respect of the authority and direction of the magistrate.
Gillespie notes that reformed churches believe (correctly) that God has
vested the magistrate with authority and is to be honored (1 Peter
2:17)[^17]. In both ways, the civil government is benefitted by the
church’s authority over the invisible and visible church.

The state also provides benefits for the church. Following our earlier
argument, Gillespie believed the purpose for which the state had the
power of the sword was to be the “keeper of both tables of the
law”[^18]. While it was the church’s prerogative to point sinners to
Christ for forgiveness from heaven, it was the magistrate’s to punish
for sin on earth. Thus the magistrate was given the power to enact
justice.

Distinct Spheres of Authority
=============================

Discipline aside, there are many other things which serve to delineate
for us the boundaries of church and state. Their differences run far
deeper than one would think at first glance. Gillespie noted several
things which the church is responsible for, which remain valid to the
present day. The first is that the church alone has the power to call
and ordain men into the pulpit ministry. This means that the church must
ensure that only men who are called and equipped fill the pulpits[^19].
Along with this, Gillespie believed that Christ has appointed exactly
how we must worship in His Word. The church must take pains to ensure
that the content and arrangement of a worship service is conforming to
the will of Christ in every regard[^20]. The church also has the
responsibility to pray for the magistrate, even if they are nonbelieving
themselves[^21]. Gillespie would agree that this is because we are a
part of a higher and greater kingdom and we know that God’s Word
commands us to love our neighbor as ourselves. Lastly, officers in the
church are responsible for staying in their own sphere of authority.
They must recognize that the keys of the kingdom do not allow them to
lord themselves over the congregation. Gillespie was concerned with
“prelates” who in this day were high ranking church officers who at
times wielded “autocratic power over congregations”[^22]. Conversely,
the church must not take a hands-off approach to reforming men. In a
dispute with Mr. Dell, Gillespie rejects that the church must leave men
alone to themselves unless Christ reforms them[^23]. There should be an
earnestness and urgency about the officers of Christ church. Keeping out
of the magistrate’s affairs, and yet not leaving men alone is a hard
balance to strike. Nevertheless, elders in the church must strive for
this balance as servants of a greater kingdom.

The civil magistrate also has a responsibility not to step on the toes
of the church. Gillespie acknowledged that it is probably most difficult
for *Christian magistrates* because they are most tempted to mix roles
and overstep the bounds of their office[^24]. For instance, ordering
that a criminal be barred from the Lord’s Table at his church. He
portrayed this sentiment well when stating “it belongs to kings to
inflict bodily punishment; it belongs to priests to bring spiritual
punishment to bear”[^25]. However, Gillespie did not believe magistrates
should then give a free pass to those who committed spiritual sins, but
rather than he could not inflict censures. This is an opinion that is
radical by today’s standards, but he believed that atheists,
blasphemers, heretics, etc should be punished by the Christian
magistrate[^26]. This is worthy of discussion in our day, and certainly
would come to bear upon many issues that we take for granted. One of the
functions of the magistrate is to restrain the sin of men by inflicting
punishment. Is not blasphemy a sin? Is not adultery? Where the church
has the responsibility to censure, does that mean the state has *no*
responsibility? Gillespie’s position should give us pause to consider
our laws and if they are lax in things which the Bible condemns.

Throughout his *111 Propositions*, Gillespie gives a framework of eight
factors which further show the distinct spheres of the civil and
ecclesiastical powers. They have a different foundation, object, form,
end, effect, respect of subjects, correlative, and a divided authority.
We will not repeat them here except to share that his distinction
between their primary focus is a helpful distinction to make. He states
that the church cares about spiritual things: the consciences of men and
the glory of God. The magistrate is concerned with earthly things: the
good of the commonwealth and the properties of men. Again, this
inward/outward distinction is a broad rule of thumb which helps us
tremendously in not overstepping boundaries.

Application to present life and ministry
========================================

Gillespie’s understanding of the relationship between the ecclesiastical
and civil governments is not perfect, but is very helpful for us today.
It is helpful for ministers when they find their parishioners facing
legal battles, for Christian magistrates wanting to honor God, and for
church members when they desire to know how to walk through trials.
There are four lessons that we can learn from Gillespie in this area:

The first is that ministers must teach on the differences between the
church and the state as they are ordained by God and used by Him for
different functions. This need not be an abstract topical exercise, but
can happen even during expository preaching in 1 Peter and other
passages. The principle of “honoring the emperor” is bound up with
understanding the function of the state overall. Many Christians view
the state as the bane of their existence, exacting unwanted tax revenue
and not doing much apparent good. If they were to be taught that the
magistrate has a distinct sphere which is complementary to the sphere of
the church, their view and appreciation of the ordinances of God would
change. Gillespie’s association of church to the inner man and civil to
the outer man is a helpful motto.

Following this, the second lesson is that “obeying God rather than men”
does not discount obeying men if there is no just reason to refuse (Acts
5:29). By understanding the church and state relationship, we know when
the state is in error. There are times when as Christians we can rightly
refute the magistrate, and there are times when we must submit ourselves
to the providences of God without complaining. We can be wise with this
distinction by knowing what the responsibilities for the magistrate are.

Thirdly, Gillespie reminds us that the “keys of the kingdom” are in a
sense given to the entire church. The burden of church discipline rests
on everyone. It is helpful here to think of different levels: the pastor
opens and shuts by his preaching, the elders open and shut by censures,
and the people give their amen by their treatment of censured people. In
all this, we must remember to be gracious. Where the civil aims rightly
at punishing offenders, the church should aim at restoring sinners to
Christ.

Lastly, we must take heart that the vision and mission of the church is
much, much higher than the magistrate. There are now two governments
instituted by Christ. One to manage the earthly affairs of men, and
another to help guide them spiritually. But a new day is coming with the
return of Christ. A day when we will be governed by God Himself
directly. There will be no sin and no punishment for God’s church.
Instead, there will be one visible kingdom, governed by one perfect
ruler. The failings of magistrates remind us of His perfect justice. The
failings of elders remind us of His perfect Grace. May this day hasten
to us. Amen.

And there shall be no more curse: but the throne of God and of the Lamb
shall be in it; and his servants shall serve him:

Revelation 22:3

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Church & state, the Biblical view: a compilation of articles from some
of the best Christian minds in history. \[Edmonton, AB: Still Waters
Revival Books, 1993.

Gillespie, George. Aaron’s rod blossoming ; or, the divine ordinance of
church government vindicated. Harrisonburg, Va: Sprinkle Publications,
1985.

———. An assertion of the government of the Church of Scotland in the
points of ruling-elders and of the authority of presbyteries and synods:
with a postscript in answer to a treatise lately published against
presbyteriall government. Dallas, TX: Printed by the Presbyterian
Treasury, 1998.

Gillespie, George, and Christopher Coldwell. A dispute against the
English popish ceremonies obtruded on the Church of Scotland: wherein
not only our own arguments against the same are strongly confirmed, but
likewise the answers and defences of our opposites, such as Hooker,
Morton, Burges, Sprint, Paybody, Andrews, Saravia, Tilen, Spotswood,
Lindsey, Forbes, etc., particularly confuted. 17th century
Presbyterians. Dallas, TX: Naphtali Press, 1993.

Gillespie, George. Give me that old time theonomy. Revival review Issue
\#26-27. Edmonton, AB: Still Waters Revival Books, n.d.

Gillespie, George, and W. M. Hetherington. The works of George
Gillespie: one of the commissioners from Scotland to the Westminster
Assembly, 1644. Numbered collectors ed. Edmonton, AB Canada: Still
Waters Revival Books, 1991.

McKay, W. D. J. An ecclesiastical republic: church government in the
writings of George Gillespie. Rutherford studies in historical theology.
Carlisle, Cumbria, U.K: Published for Rutherford House by Paternoster
Press, 1997.

[^1]: . W. D. J. McKay, *An ecclesiastical republic: church government
    in the writings of George Gillespie*, Rutherford studies in
    historical theology (Carlisle, Cumbria, U.K: Published for
    Rutherford House by Paternoster Press, 1997), 9.

[^2]: . George Gillespie and W. M. Hetherington, *The works of George
    Gillespie: one of the commissioners from Scotland to the Westminster
    Assembly, 1644*, Numbered collectors ed. (Edmonton, AB Canada: Still
    Waters Revival Books, 1991), 1:13.

[^3]: . McKay, *An ecclesiastical republic*, 85.

[^4]: . Gillespie and Hetherington, *The works of George Gillespie*,
    1:14.

[^5]: . McKay, *An ecclesiastical republic*, 90.

[^6]: . George Gillespie, *Aaron’s rod blossoming ; or, the divine
    ordinance of church government vindicated* (Harrisonburg, Va:
    Sprinkle Publications, 1985), 90.

[^7]: . Gillespie and Hetherington, *The works of George Gillespie*,
    1:14.

[^8]: . George Gillespie and Christopher Coldwell, *A dispute against
    the English popish ceremonies obtruded on the Church of Scotland:
    wherein not only our own arguments against the same are strongly
    confirmed, but likewise the answers and defences of our opposites,
    such as Hooker, Morton, Burges, Sprint, Paybody, Andrews, Saravia,
    Tilen, Spotswood, Lindsey, Forbes, etc., particularly confuted*,
    17th century Presbyterians (Dallas, TX: Naphtali Press, 1993), 373.

[^9]: . Gillespie and Coldwell, *A dispute against the English popish
    ceremonies obtruded on the Church of Scotland*, 379–380.

[^10]: . McKay, *An ecclesiastical republic*, 85–86.

[^11]: . Gillespie and Coldwell, *A dispute against the English popish
    ceremonies obtruded on the Church of Scotland*, 371.

[^12]: . McKay, *An ecclesiastical republic*, 86.

[^13]: . Gillespie and Hetherington, *The works of George Gillespie*,
    1:6.

[^14]: . Gillespie and Hetherington, *The works of George Gillespie*,
    1:6.

[^15]: . George Gillespie, *Give me that old time theonomy*, Revival
    review Issue \#26-27 (Edmonton, AB: Still Waters Revival Books,
    n.d.), 3.

[^16]: . Gillespie and Hetherington, *The works of George Gillespie*,
    1:12.

[^17]: . Gillespie and Hetherington, *The works of George Gillespie*,
    1:12.

[^18]: . Gillespie and Hetherington, *The works of George Gillespie*,
    1:12.

[^19]: . Gillespie and Hetherington, *The works of George Gillespie*,
    1:5.

[^20]: . Gillespie and Hetherington, *The works of George Gillespie*,
    1:5.

[^21]: . Gillespie and Hetherington, *The works of George Gillespie*,
    1:12.

[^22]: . George Gillespie, *An assertion of the government of the Church
    of Scotland in the points of ruling-elders and of the authority of
    presbyteries and synods: with a postscript in answer to a treatise
    lately published against presbyteriall government* (Dallas, TX:
    Printed by the Presbyterian Treasury, 1998), 96.

[^23]: . *Church & state, the Biblical view: a compilation of articles
    from some of the best Christian minds in history* (\[Edmonton, AB:
    Still Waters Revival Books, 1993), 70.

[^24]: . Gillespie and Hetherington, *The works of George Gillespie*,
    1:18-19.

[^25]: . Gillespie and Coldwell, *A dispute against the English popish
    ceremonies obtruded on the Church of Scotland*, 369.

[^26]: . Gillespie and Hetherington, *The works of George Gillespie*,
    1:12.
