Puritan Reformed Theological Seminary

**Kinsman Redeemer in the Old Testament**

Joshua Lamb

142: Biblical Theology: Old Testament

November 29, 2014

Introduction
============

One of the most important words in the Bible is *redemption*, the act of
buying back. The concept of redemption was woven into the fabric of
Israel as a tribal society in the Old Testament, in which the “kinsman
redeemer” had several roles as the next-of-kin in special
circumstances[^1]. This paper seeks to trace the role of kinsman
redeemer as it is uncovered in the Old Testament, exploring how Christ
ultimately fulfills this role for the believer, and showing the
practical significance of this revelation to the life of the church.

The role of kinsman redeemer is an underlying theme throughout the
entirety of the Old Testament. The need for redemption is introduced
immediately after creation and Adam’s fall into sin. Various shadows and
types of redemption become part of the fabric of human history as God
starts to reveal how He is going to restore what was broken during the
fall of Adam.

Ultimately, God’s redemption is in the person of Jesus Christ and His
shed blood on the cross. This act of kinship redemption creates a family
from every tribe, language, and nation on earth. The question then
becomes: how does this reality impact the life of the church?

Christ’s redemption places Him as the Head and bridegroom of the family
of God, it also gives believers a source of identity that flows from
Him. Saints understand that they belong somewhere and that they have an
identity that transcends all other categories and labels they would be
tempted to place themselves in. Their true identity is that they have
been bought back from sin by God, through Jesus Christ.

Murder after Exile
==================

Early on in the pages of Scripture we see quickly the consequences of
original sin. Adam and Eve’s fall in the garden is followed up almost
immediately with the first death. It is no coincidence that the breaking
of the first great commandment to love God, results in the breaking of
the second commandment to love our neighbor. These fractures display
both the need for vengeance and the original design for human love.

We were created to walk in communion with God and selfless fellowship
with our neighbor. In this state, we would always lovingly look out for
the interests of others around us, eagerly seeking opportunities to
serve them. When God finds Cain after he has murdered his brother, God
asks “Where is Abel thy brother?” and Cain responds “I know not: Am I my
brother’s keeper?” (Genesis 4:9). The answer is that he was indeed his
brother’s keeper, but that his sinful heart led him to not only forsake
that responsibility but to strive against it. His jealousy and
selfishness led him to take the life of his own kin.

God then says to Cain “What hast thou done? the voice of thy brother’s
blood crieth unto me from the ground.” (Genesis 4:10). Cain’s deed has
now created the need for vengeance. The blood that was spilt must now be
answered for. Justice must be dealt in accordance with the nature of
God. This first act of human injustice reveals to us the need for a
brother who will not selfishly murder, but will selflessly lay down his
life. Who will answer to the blood that cries out from the ground? Who
will restore what sin has made broken?

Freedom from Bondage
====================

As the narrative of Scripture unfolds, God calls a man named Abram away
from his homeland and establishes the nation of Israel. They will be His
people and He will be their God. As this new nation settles in the land
of Egypt they become enslaved to the Egyptians for 400 years. However,
God is raising up one who will deliver His people from their bondage. A
child is born who will grow up in Pharaoh’s court and will then forsake
the pleasures of Egypt to identify with and deliver the people of God
from bondage. God calls to this man, Moses, through a burning bush and
says “Now therefore, behold, the cry of the children of Israel is come
unto me: and I have also seen the oppression wherewith the Egyptians
oppress them. Come now therefore, and I will send thee unto Pharaoh,
that thou mayest bring forth my people the children of Israel out of
Egypt.” (Exodus 3:9-10). God makes Moses into a redeemer who identifies
with the kinship of Israel. He then issues the Ten Commandments to Moses
on Mount Sinai.

 The responsibility of kin
==========================

The giving of the Ten Commandments is the act of God granting His
precepts to a people freed from bondage. In this revelation it is made
clear that God is jealous for His worship and for the care of human
beings made in His image. In addition to the Ten Commandments, God
further reveals His will by weaving kinship laws into the fabric of
tribal Israel. The precepts of God are bound to the tribal nature of
Israel, the family of God. Certain obligations are now given to the
kinsmen of those who have suffered loss.

The kinsman redeemer is obligated to redeem land (Leviticus 25:25-28),
provide an heir (Genesis 38:8-10), avenge death (Numbers 35:16-21), and
redeem the enslaved (Leviticus 25:47-55)[^2]. These obligations point to
God’s original design for humanity as a mutually supportive community
that looks to God for guidance and seeks to take care of those who are
displaced. Throughout the Old Testament, God repeatedly mentions concern
for those who are typically oppressed by society such as orphans,
widows, and strangers. This concern is reflected by the statement “Learn
to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless,
plead for the widow.” (Isaiah 1:17).

When these groups are oppressed it is always an indicator of the
wickedness that is upon the earth. When a society turns from God and
continually embraces sinfulness, the poor treatment of the disadvantaged
is sure to follow. This was repeatedly true in the nation of Israel and
is still true to this day. The obligation of the kinsman redeemer to
avenge points to the Lord, as the answer to the earlier question “Who
will answer to the blood?” is revealed to be God Himself. The Lord says
“To me belongeth vengeance, and recompence; their foot shall slide in
due time: for the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things that
shall come upon them make haste.” (Deuteronomy 32:35). The history of
the creation and redemption of the people of Egypt point ultimately to
the fact that God Himself is the redeemer of His people.

Redemption of the Outsider
==========================

As the mysterious of redemption continue to unfold, the book of Ruth
presents a key to understanding how God will redeem His people. He will
redeem them not only from the nation of Israel, but from the whole
earth. One will come who will redeem God’s people from every tribe,
tongue, and nation.

The story begins with a recently widowed Israelite named Naomi. She is
currently breaking God’s law by residing in the foreign nation of Moab.
News arrives that the Lord has provided food in Israel and Naomi departs
from Moab with her daughter-in-law, Ruth. Naomi states that Ruth does
not need to follow her, but Ruth replies that Naomi’s God will be her
God also[^3]. Ruth forsakes the false gods of Moab and begins a journey
that will lead to her becoming part of the lineage of Jesus.

In Israel, Ruth begins gleaning from a field belonging to a man named
Boaz. Wonderfully, God’s law has made provision for her to glean on the
outskirts of this field. According to Deuteronomy “When thou cuttest
down thine harvest in thy field, and hast forgot a sheaf in the field,
thou shalt not go again to fetch it: it shall be for the stranger, for
the fatherless, and for the widow: that the Lord thy God may bless thee
in all the work of thine hands.” (Deuteronomy 24:19). Ruth meets all
three qualifications: she is a stranger, is fatherless, and also a
widow[^4]. Although she is a foreigner outside the people of Israel, she
is allowed to partake in God’s graceful provision.

As Ruth encounters Boaz in the field, she sees him greeting and having a
personal connection with the people of his field, a field in which there
is no lack[^5]. Underlying the story is the presumption that Boaz is
wealthy, as indicated by numerous references to a bounty of produce. As
the story develops, we see that Boaz is a type of Christ in the Old
Testament. He is a shadow and precursor that points to Jesus, the
wealthy field owner of heaven, in whom there is also no lack.

The central aspect of the story is the redemption of Ruth by Boaz. She
learns that Boaz is one of the redeemers of the family. In a daring plan
she asks for her redemption, which he swears to perform[^6]. He does not
rest until the next day when it is accomplished in the sight of many
witnesses[^7]. The redemption complete, the book draws to a close with
the wedding of Boaz and Ruth and the birth of a child[^8]. This child,
named Obed, becomes the grandfather of King David, himself a type of
Christ.

Christ our Redeemer
===================

Since the fall of Adam and Eve into sin, the question of who will repair
what was made broken still echoed throughout Scripture. The Exodus,
provisions in the Levitical law, and narratives such as Ruth pointed to
the need of one who would fully and finally redeem God’s people. We
needed one who could finally and completely fulfill all the
characteristics of a kinsman redeemer: appointed by God, near of kin,
free from debt, able, willing, specific, and able to raise up seed[^9].

The most important characteristic was that this redeemer had to be
appointed by God Himself as the agent of the redemption. Throughout the
Bible, God’s chosen men such as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and King
David were divinely appointed by God for their task. None of them
searched for it independently. They acted only upon what they received
from God. The Lord ascribes the divine appointment of Jesus even in
statements of self-declaration such as “Thus saith the LORD the King of
Israel, *and his redeemer the LORD of hosts*; I am the first, and I am
the last; and beside me there is no God.” (Isaiah 44:6, emphasis added).

The second characteristic was the nearness of kin. This redeemer of God
had to identify with sinful man in a way that was very close. There was
only one way this could be accomplished – God had to wrap Himself in
flesh to identify with sinful humanity. The prophet Isaiah declares
“Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; Behold, a virgin
shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel.”
(Isaiah 7:14). The incarnation of Christ made him into a near kinsman of
those he came to save.

The redeemer also could not be indebted himself. He had to be free from
debt and also able to pay for the debt of those who were in bondage.
Isaiah prophesies about Christ “He shall see of the travail of his soul,
and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities.” (Isaiah 53:11). Jesus
was qualified to redeem because of His infinite wealth of righteousness,
but also because he was to use that wealth to pay for the debt of all
those in the past, present, and future that would be redeemed.

Fifth, this coming redeemer had to be willing. Not reluctant or
performing this act out of compulsion but out of joy. That Jesus Christ
was the second member of the Trinity is evidence of His willingness to
condescend down to earth and become a redeemer for mankind. While some
leaders in the Old Testament grumbled or complained, Jesus’ redemption
on the cross was a willful act. Isaiah states “All we like sheep have
gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and the LORD hath
laid on him the iniquity of us all.” (Isaiah 53:6).

The redemption itself also had to be specific. Who is the audience of
this redemption? The answer to this question is most specifically all
those who are covered by the blood of Jesus. The Exodus precursor was
the blood of the lamb on the doorposts of the Israelites, “For the LORD
will pass through to smite the Egyptians; and when he seeth the blood
upon the lintel, and on the two side posts, the LORD will pass over the
door, and will not suffer the destroyer to come in unto your houses to
smite you.” (Exodus 12:23). Likewise, Jesus has fully redeemed all those
who have been covered by His blood atonement on the cross. In the same
manner as the Passover sacrifice of the lamb, death passes over us.

Lastly, the purpose of redemption is to continue a family – to raise up
seed and continue a lineage. God repeatedly promised to Abraham that the
family of God would be through his offspring. Genesis states “And I will
establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed after thee in
their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee,
and to thy seed after thee.” (Genesis 17:7). Jesus fulfills this promise
to adopt all those who He has chosen to redeem, effectively creating a
family from both Jews and Gentiles.

Implications for the Church
===========================

The redemption of Jesus Christ has profound implications for the life of
the believer and the life of the church. His completed work on the cross
places Him as the Head and bridegroom of the family of God. Three things
stand out in particular: the believer’s adopted identity, the church’s
spiritual family, and the future consummation.

Because of Christ’s ransom, the believer has a categorically different
identity from that of an unbeliever. An unbeliever has a *created*
identity, manufactured from both nature and nurture. This identity is
self-given and may be redefined at any time according to changing
circumstances such as social environment or sexual desire. In contrast,
the identity of the believer is *adopted*[^10]. The believer cannot
create this identity, rather it is sourced from outside. It is the act
of being purchased and brought in by Christ that establishes this
identity. The most fundamental shift is that the believer is now not who
*they* say they are, but who *God* says they are. The source of their
identity is now no longer the labels they would attach to themselves, it
is the Word of God.

Secondly, a purpose of redemption is to further a lineage. Christ’s
redemption creates and sustains this lineage, containing both Jews and
Gentiles. This is important because it informs the church that it
originates in the work of Christ. Not only does the church know where it
came from, it also knows why it exists – for the bridegroom. All too
easily, the church can perpetuate as an institution and get lost in the
purpose for which it exists. The purpose of the church is not to
perpetuate ideas or to be a social club, or a place to learn concepts
for self-help. The church exists for a person, the bridegroom Jesus
Christ.

The church now waits together in the period between redemption and
consummation, recognizing that one was made for the other. What other
purpose is there for redemption than for it to be ultimately
consummated? This is a source of great encouragement, for as surely as
there was an action there will be a consequence. The church has a reason
for tremendous hope because there is both a person and a future to hope
in!

Together these implications of Christ’s redemption define and govern how
believers understand themselves and the church in relation to God.

Conclusion
==========

In conclusion, the role of kinsman redeemer in the Old Testament is
fully and finally accomplished by the God who wrapped Himself in flesh
as our kin and redeemed us by His atonement and death. His act is the
source and creation of the church as a body of redeemed people. The
church now waits together in eager anticipation at the final union
between a resurrected Savior and His resurrected people.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Andersen, David V. “When God adopts.” *Christianity Today* 37, no. 8
(July 19, 1993): 36.

Brown, Robert. In *Gleanings from the book of Ruth: or, The book of Ruth
opened out by comparison with other parts of Scripture*, 49–71. London:
S.W. Partridge, 1887.

Campbell, Iain D. In *The Gospel according to Ruth: devotional studies
in the book of Ruth*, 72–119. Epsom: Day One, 2003.

Fortner, Donald S. In *Discovering Christ in Ruth: the
kinsman-redeemer*, 103–105. Darlington: Evangelical Press, 1999.

Hamlin, E. John. *Surely there is a future: a commentary on the book of
Ruth*. International theological commentary. Grand Rapid, Mich. :
Edinburgh: Eerdmans ; Handsel Press Ltd, 1996.

Manser, Martin H. *Dictionary of Bible Themes: The Accessible and
Comprehensive Tool for Topical Studies*. Martin Manser, 2009.

Taylor, William M. *Ruth the gleaner and Esther the queen*. New York:
Harper and brothers, 1891.

Thompson, J. A. *Kin, Kinsman*. Edited by D. R. W. Wood, I. H. Marshall,
A. R. Millard, J. I. Packer, and D. J.Editors Wiseman. 3rd ed.
InterVarsity Press, 1996.

[^1]: . J. A. Thompson, *Kin, Kinsman*, ed by. D. R. W. Wood et al., 3rd
    ed. (InterVarsity Press, 1996).

[^2]: . Martin H. Manser, *Dictionary of Bible Themes: The Accessible
    and Comprehensive Tool for Topical Studies* (Martin Manser, 2009).

[^3]: . Robert Brown, in *Gleanings from the book of Ruth: or, The book
    of Ruth opened out by comparison with other parts of Scripture*
    (London: S.W. Partridge, 1887), 49–71.

[^4]: . Iain D. Campbell, in *The Gospel according to Ruth: devotional
    studies in the book of Ruth* (Epsom: Day One, 2003), 72–119.

[^5]: . Campbell.

[^6]: . E. John Hamlin, *Surely there is a future: a commentary on the
    book of Ruth*, International theological commentary (Grand Rapid,
    Mich. : Edinburgh: Eerdmans ; Handsel Press Ltd, 1996).

[^7]: . Brown.

[^8]: . William M. Taylor, *Ruth the gleaner and Esther the queen* (New
    York: Harper and brothers, 1891).

[^9]: . Donald S. Fortner, in *Discovering Christ in Ruth: the
    kinsman-redeemer* (Darlington: Evangelical Press, 1999), 103–105.

[^10]: . David V. Andersen, “When God adopts,” *Christianity Today* 37,
    no. 8 (July 19, 1993): 36.
