Puritan Reformed Theological Seminary

**Leadership Model Paper**

Joshua Lamb

615: Leadership & Administration

November 20, 2014

Introduction
============

This paper seeks to review and critique 13 models of leadership and how
they can practically be applied in the context of pastoral ministry.

In order to define what effective leadership looks like it is helpful to
examine the purpose, character, satisfaction, and secret of Christian
leadership. Dr. Murray provides a very thorough definition for Christian
leadership, beginning with the statement that a Christian leader serves
God and His people.

### Purpose of Christian leadership

Keeping first things first, the Christian leader is a servant of God. He
is not out for his own gain or to build his own kingdom. It is out of
his love for God that he desires to serve Christ and the fellow body of
believers. In this sense, the leader is living out the role that any
believer is called to by Jesus in Matthew 22:35-40, when He states that
the two greatest commandments are to love God and to love your neighbor
as yourself.

The part that helped in this lecture were the questions regarding the
dependence upon God. In order to practically fulfill the two great
commandments, it is necessary to think through how we can serve God and
others day to day. Practical questions that helped me were:

-   “Are you demonstrating the need for a weekly Sabbath rest?”

    -   This is something that was a new concept coming into seminary
        training due to a differing background. However, as this concept
        is rightly biblical, it is something I have started to implement
        and guard.

-   “Are you drawing wise boundaries in your relationships with other
    women in the congregation?”

    -   Thinking about how to draw these boundaries led me to adopt the
        rule that no counseling would take place with women unless there
        was another party present that was trusted by the counselee.
        This is a great way to uphold the qualification that a leader
        should be well thought of by outsiders and that there not be a
        hint of sexual immorality. (1 Timothy 3:7, Ephesians 5:3)

-   “Are you exercising wise time management?”

    -   The time management exercise helped immensely to evaluate this
        area, but the short answer is no. Time management becomes
        exponentially more important in a pastoral setting because there
        is no earthly boss to assign tasks and follow up on
        their completion. A congregation would expect to hear preaching
        on Sunday as well as access to the pastor for counseling
        throughout the week. However, how this is accomplished is up to
        the Christian leader, making it vital that time is managed well.
        Since the time management exercise, I have adopted a tighter
        regimen on sleep and exercise, as well as continued use of a
        task management tool. These three things have helped immensely
        in managing my time.

-   “Are you guarding personal devotion time?”

    -   This is an area that has not been perfect for me, but has
        consistently improved. Remembering again that the Christian
        leader must fulfill the commandments to love God and love
        neighbor, the most important practical step is the giving of the
        day’s first fruits to God in prayer and Bible reading. Any day
        in which this does not happen is a failed day in a sense,
        because we are meant to center each day around the worship of
        God and the establishment of His purposes.

### Character of Christian leadership

The light of the purpose of a Christian leader as examined above, it is
helpful to establish qualifications for assessing the character of men
who aspire to leadership. How will we examine potential leaders in God’s
kingdom? Scripture answers this question with qualifications and
responsibilities of Elders and Deacons. In a sense, many of these
qualifications boil down to desire. Do you desire to glorify yourself,
or to glorify God?

Three desires stood out in the lecture that demanded self-reflection:
the desire to be respected & recognized, to be more fulfilled in life,
and to be wanted. These impure self-glorifying desires can lurk in the
heart and cause destruction. The desire to be respected is of concern
personally because it is an easy lie to believe that ministry is somehow
a higher calling than any other field in which a man works. This is
untrue. God is not more proud of the pastor than he is of the carpenter.
God calls men to various works and vocations in order to fulfill His
purposes through the people he has gifted for each work. The reminder of
my former occupation as a soldier helps to curb this belief in my own
heart, as well as the desire to love Christ’s sheep in all life
circumstances and occupations.

The desire to be fulfilled can also lead many to pursue ministry in
order to feel as if it is a surefire path to greater joy and happiness.
This is also untrue. While there is joy in Christian leadership, it is
not likely that being a leader is intrinsically more fulfilling that
being a disciple in any other context. The motivation in Christian
leadership is to please God, not to please self.

Lastly, the desire to be wanted is a ready trap of Christian leadership.
Perhaps someone may feel lonely and unwanted and decide to pursue
ministry because of the constant demands of people. However, it is
likely that someone who is placed in this position in order to feel a
sense of need will soon get tired of living under the constant pressure
from multiple people. This is not a desire that can bear the demanding
weight of Christian leadership.

All these wrong desires have been in my heart at some point in the last
few years, but an examination reveals that they do not have the staying
power to carry the weight of pastoral ministry. Only true and pure
desire to glorify God will be blessed by the granting of His strength to
perform the hard tasks of Christian leadership. Only the desire for God
is strong enough to supplant the times when the leader is faced with
hardship, criticism, loneliness, and other trials.

### Satisfaction of Christian leadership

Too much reflection on the wrong aspirations for Christian leadership
can cause one to be pessimistic, forgetting the immense joys of
Christian ministry. The lecture discussed many different areas of godly
satisfaction for the leader, including preaching, contact with family,
and receiving God’s provision.

One joy that was not mentioned in the lecture was the gift of seeing
families and children grow together in the fear of the Lord and develop
as a community. While some aspects of this were discussed, the full
wonder of watching an entire community of families grow, get married,
have children, and be ushered in to glory is a wonderful thing. The
week-to-week responsibilities of Christian leadership can leave a leader
shortsighted and easily forgetful of the huge impact God is making
through them in order to build not just His kingdom, but his family of
saints.

### Secret of Christian leadership

In light of the purposes, character, and satisfaction of Christian
leadership, what is the key concept that practically allows a leader to
fulfill their obligations? Dr. Murray states that the secret to
successful Christian leadership is *balance!* Three culprits were listed
that imbalance us: our own temperament, our sin, and our role models.
However I would add that outside expectations also imbalance us.

Very often, when a minister assumes responsibilities at a new church,
there are written and unwritten expectations of the minister. Some
things may be biblical while some things are “just the way we have
always done it”. If these demands are too high, they can lead to a
severe imbalance in the priorities of this new leader. He can feel
handicapped to a life of wheel spinning instead of following God’s
vision for that the church should become. This is why it is important to
set priorities and expectations early on between the leader and the
people.

Personally, this has been an area of great meditation, knowing that the
seminary years are the best time to reflect on these issues. Two things
are important: the setting of priorities and the setting of the calendar
according to those priorities. The priorities of a minister are: 1)
Christian, 2) husband, 3) father, 4) minister. Especially given the
Biblical qualification for elders to manage their own household well, it
is important that this is placed as a higher priority to that a leader’s
family at home does not fall apart at the expense of trying to further
the church family. What needs to be communicated is that when the
leader’s family suffers, ultimately the church suffers as a result.

It seems quite useful and practical that developing and submitting a
proposed calendar to the board of elders is an actionable step that can
be taken to clearly communicate and abide by these priorities, to the
Glory of God and the benefit of the church.

In conclusion, the Christian leader is not a CEO or a king, but is
instead a servant of God and His people. It is necessary that potential
leaders are evaluated in light of the qualifications listed in the
Scriptures, and also that these potential leaders are self-reflective of
the things which cause them to be imbalanced. While ministry is indeed
difficult, it is also a source of great joy to see the building of God’s
church and the advancement of His kingdom.

The Humble Servant
==================

While the previous section discussed the mission and goal of the
Christian leader, how are we to posture ourselves to accomplish this?
The answer lies in adopting the attitude of humility. This section will
reflect on the wrong mindset of pride, its consequences, and cure.

The lecture discussed that pride can often be caused by a misjudgment of
the nature of leadership as well as a misunderstanding of what ministry
is. As observed in the previous topic, ministry and Christian leadership
are not about establishing good position for oneself but about pouring
oneself out in the service of others. This caused me to reflect on the
repeated situation in the Gospels where the disciples attempted to gain
positions of rank and bickered about who would be the greatest (Mark
9:33-37). They underestimated how radically different the kingdom of
heaven is from the kingdom of mankind. It also spurred deeper reflection
on how God’s kingdom reflects the nature of the triune God, who operates
selflessly between the members of the trinity. When a Christian leader
pours himself out in the service of others he isn’t simply doing a nice
thing, he isn’t even simply doing a loving thing, he is imaging the
nature of God!

What happens if the wrong mindset of pride is allowed to play out to
full effect? The lecture focused on the personal relational consequences
of a pastor that becomes impatient, insensitive, and has an inflated
view of himself. However, the consequences do not stop at one person.
Due to the nature of Christian leadership, the impact of a prideful
leader can severely tear the fabric of the believing community, stain
witness for Christ, and cause damage to the neighboring community. It is
important not only to think of the personal consequences but also of the
larger effects of even one man’s pride.

How then can pride be cured? Dr. Murray revealed that focusing on the
realities of the smallness of man is a great antidote to the poison of
pride. However, this is only one half of the equation. The other half is
meditating on the largeness and graciousness of God. If man’s pride
puffs himself up, the key to realizing he is small is to compare himself
to God. God spoke the universe into existence. God laid the foundations
of the earth. God ransomed sinners. God defeated satan, sin, and death.
By these standards what is man that God is even mindful of him? (Psalm
8:4)

In conclusion, the Christian leader can ironically fall into the sinful
trap of pride. However, continual reflection on the reality of the
differences between God and man can attack the pride which left to run
wild could seriously damage the church and undermine anything the
Christian leader initially set out to accomplish.

The Patient Shepherd
====================

One of the characteristics of the prideful person described above is an
impatient attitude towards those whom the leader serves. In contrast,
the humble leader should emanate patience. This section explores the
character of a patient leader and practical aspect of pastoral
visitation.

The lecture focused on many characteristics of a shepherd that flow out
of love. From the posture of love the desire to feed, lead, pursue, and
persevere is born. One of the last remarks in this section of the
lecture was that the shepherd is also aware that *he is also a sheep*.
While this is something that the leader can be aware of, it is also
necessary to communicate this at some point to the followers of the
leader. If no weakness is shown or repentance modeled, it can be the
default mode that the leader is viewed as somehow in a higher position
or superhuman.

One of the best ways that pastors can show their humanity is through
home visitation. The patient shepherd is one that knows their flock well
and how to care for them, and home visitation is one of the best methods
of learning about the flock. The class lecture contained several
practical tips for how to conduct home visitation, including several
questions to begin a spiritual conversation. A good addition to this
section would be more practical tips for following up the visit. One way
is to look not only to the external needs of a particular family but
also how to connect their internal needs to the body of Christ. A home
visit can be used to inform the family about areas of the church that
they might be gifted to serve. This requires some tact to communicate
well, but believers should be exhorted and encouraged to give of their
gifts to serve the body. A true leader not only models a life of
service, but also encourages others to walk the same path. This is a
conversation that could be hinted at during a home visit, and then
followed up on with a later phone call.

In summary, the patient shepherd should communicate and be open to share
their humanity as well as to encourage other believers, knowing that
changes are likely to take some time to develop. True love for Christ’s
sheep and recognition that oneself is also a sheep are two things that
empower the leader as they seek to patiently labor for the kingdom of
heaven.

The Courageous Captain
======================

One of the most lacking character traits of today’s leader is
*courage*[^1]. The Christian leader must be acquainted with the sources
of fear, the need for courage, and the resources to build courage.

Perhaps one of the most unique aspects of pastoral ministry is that the
sources of fear lie so easily within the church. The pressure to give in
to fear in order to appease man can be constant. Perhaps it is the fear
of the rich donor or the prospect of unpopularity that often cause the
temptation to compromise allegiance to Christ and His Word. Pastoral
ministry is often stated to be one of the loneliest endeavors a man can
undertake, fraught with false friendships and ulterior motives[^2]. This
can cause a minister to seek to soften the message in order to win
friends and influence.

However, softening the message is failing to proclaim the truth of the
Gospel, at which point the minister might as well pack up and go home.
Courage is needed to oppose the world system and also to confront those
who would seek to destroy the church from within. Courage is needed to
bind up the weak, the downtrodden, the abused, and the brokenhearted.
Courage is needed to build Christ’s church when every step forward seems
to be accompanied by three steps backward. How then do we build and
maintain courage?

The lectures discussed practical steps such as memorizing Scripture,
trusting in the Lord, holding on to His promises, and remembering the
final judgment. These aspects of God’s means of grace are definitely the
first priority. However, the temptation can be to view courage as a solo
act – a lone ranger against the world. While the Bible records many
times when leaders had to stand alone, we might not have to on every
occasion. One of the ways we can build courage is to develop biblical
friendships, counselors with whom we can make many wise plans. This
helps to build our courage because we don’t have to be alone in every
decision we make. There will certainly be times we are betrayed, but
these friendships are worth pursuing because the benefits far outweigh
the consequences.

While pastoral ministry is filled with many sources of fear from many
different directions, we must not lose heart. Clinging to God’s promises
and building solid biblical friendships will help us to weather the
storms of life as we seek to expand God’s church.

Honest Steward
==============

Conscience could be described as the inner moral compass God has given
us. Not many things are more important to handle with a clean conscience
than money, especially as a Christian leader. This section will reflect
on the correct posture towards money with regards to the personal and
pastoral implications.

Given that the proper handling of money is essential to a clean
conscience before God, it is vitally important that we adopt the right
attitude. The lecture rightly identified that the biblical attitude
towards money is one of a steward. A steward is not the owner of
property, but he will give an account to the owner when he returns. This
is precisely the relationship we have with what God has given us. In
fact, not only money is in this category - all of life is. This also
includes our time, talent, possessions, and relationships. Our adoption
into God’s kingdom is described as a purchase, causing us to not even
have ownership of our own body!

Effective stewardship does not begin at the church, rather it begins in
the home. The lecture discussed many practical steps to budget, save,
invest, and insure. However, before all these steps are accomplished it
is necessary to sit down and decide which budget categories are the
highest priority. If funds are not available for everything, what falls
off? Does giving or tithing? Insurance? Thinking through these
priorities causes us to go to prayer and ask God what our priorities
should be. After all, we are merely stewards. Laying our financial
priorities before the throne of grace is one of the most fruitful and
practical activities in sanctification. This is vital because of the
close-knit relationship between money and the heart. The Bible is
serious about the connection “For where your treasure is, there your
heart will be also” (Matthew 6:21).

In conclusion, it is the proper attitude towards money that will allow
us to search out the practical steps necessary to be a good steward of
the resources God has granted to us. By prioritizing our stewardship of
the home we set the pattern for stewardship of the family of the church.

Wise Communicator
=================

This section explores the best practices on giving and receiving
communication. Humble and attentive listening is found to be the key
catalyst for speaking with clarity and authority.

The lecture focused initially on the message itself. This is certainly
important in any situation, especially when considering the task of a
minister is to deliver the Gospel to the church. However, as the lecture
continued it focused on the aspects of the communicator such as
clarifying the message and “creating the hearing scenario in your mind”.
While these concepts were important, the relationship of the speaker and
the message to the listener is of paramount importance. In pastoral
ministry, the message itself is a non-negotiable – the Gospel cannot be
tampered with. However, the audience should be considered a lot more
often and a lot sooner in the process of developing the message. For
instance, the preparation of a sermon should involve the envisioning of
how different sub-groups within the church will hear the message
differently. A single divorcee, a long-married couple, a child, a
teenager, and a widower will all hear the same message in different
ways. The minister is in a unique position to not just have cursory
knowledge of the audience, but a deep awareness of the demographic that
worships at their church every week. While the lecture focuses on many
concepts, this is one that could be brought out more as it is critically
important to how the message is delivered.

An additional consideration in the aspect of sending communication
should be “How does this tell the story of the Gospel, the organization,
and the people in the organization?” Many forms of communication are
better told as stories because people connect to them. Not all e-mails,
meeting minutes, or blog posts fit the mold of a story – but many forms
of communication do! Ignoring how to incorporate communication into a
narrative leaves a bland and ho-hum impression on the receiver. Learning
to “narrativize” communication would be a vital skill for leaders to
learn because receivers in any context are attracted to stories.
However, with all the considerations for how to deliver a message
effectively, perhaps none is more valuable than the relationship between
the speaker and the audience.

If you want your message to be heard, the best method is to develop
yourself into someone that also hears. Effective listening is vital in
communication because if true listening isn’t present, the conversation
either becomes two people talking over each other, or a useless event in
which no real information was exchanged. How then can real listening be
achieved?

The lecture focused on two concepts which were very valuable: patient
listening and loving listening. It was interesting to learn that
patience is required due to the fact that the human mind processes
information much faster than it can speak – meaning the listener has to
deliberately exercise patience in order to keep up with the slow pace of
communication. Secondly, listening has to be done in love. If there is a
lack of love there will be a lack of interest in the activity of
listening. As I thought about the truthfulness of this statement it
caused me to think of ways to “stir up love” that would help to be a
more effective listener.

There are at least three ways to build love for the communicator in many
situations: awareness of the *imago Dei* (image of God), trust in God’s
providence, and desire to build God’s kingdom. The recognition of the
*imago Dei* is important to listening because it transforms our
perception of the person we are listening to from a person who is using
up our time to a person who was made in God’s image. This person is
valuable, and although they may struggle communicating their thoughts,
their perceptions are important nonetheless. They possess inherent
dignity and must be treated with respect to this dignity.

The trust in God’s providence is also vital because we need to see every
conversation with someone as being ordained by God. This is not a
stretch of the imagination, it is fact. Our God controls everything from
the rotation of the earth to the loss of each hair on our head. Every
conversation is an opportunity that is given to us by God – even the
mundane ones.

Lastly, a desire to build God’s kingdom should permeate our listening.
We should be thinking of questions such as “How can this person be
encouraged, exhorted, or rebuked?” If we neglect to show concern for the
expansion of God’s kingdom, we are more likely to view conversations as
a wasteful exercise.

In conclusion, both the act of clear communication and attentive
listening are vital skills for the Christian leader. The thing that
powerfully defines if these skills are effective and genuine is the
presence of love. It is the passionate love of people that drives
authentic, clear, convicting speech. It is this same love that drives
patient, gracious, sincere listening.

Social Media Maven
==================

Al Mohler rightly concluded that the digital world is now a fundamental
fact of life[^3]. Love it or hate it, social media is here to stay. In
some sense it represents as big of a leap forward in communication as
the printing press, with the same ability to multiply influence across
geography and across generations. This section focuses on how the
lecture sparked reflection on social media policy and techniques.

The lecture steered clear of the debate in the church regarding the use
of social media and assumed that social media would be used. This
represented a different viewpoint than the one I have been adopting
recently. Over the past year, I have travelled in the opposite direction
of trying to gain more peace and solitude. The Facebook account was
deactivated, I rarely checked Twitter, and a recent class assignment on
time management caused me to check emails and texts less often as well.
Did all of these attempts to gain solitude work? Only marginally. I
found helpful steps along the way, such as turning my notification
frequency way down so that I don’t get distracted by every beep and
buzz. However, over the past year my personal influence has waned. I
thought that turning off the channels would mean that other people would
call me more often and have actual conversations on the phone, write
longer emails, and perhaps send a handwritten letter or two. Instead,
shutting yourself off from the channels that everyone uses causes you to
in some ways disappear off people’s radar. With this experience, what is
the best way to navigate the usage of social media?

It is starting to become personally evident that it is not turning off
the channels, but rather *wise use of* the channels that is truly
important. There are two things in particular that are helpful to
implement: wise use of frequency, and wise posting of content.

As stated earlier, reducing the frequency of incoming messages was a
helpful lesson from a class assignment. The biggest practical step was
turning notifications OFF for long blocks of time. After a while, I
could go hours without thinking about checking email. The saying “out of
sight out of mind” was definitely at play here. As mentioned in the
lecture, the brain doesn’t multi-task very well and fast switching
between tasks is very damaging to your attention span over the long
haul. The lingering question when taking this step is “What if someone
really needs to get in touch with me for an emergency?” The answer is
that in this case it is a risk that I am willing to take. It is also
worth noting that for cell phones, Google released new version in
November 2014 that allows you to select some contacts that can break
through even if the notifications are turned off. This leaves no excuse
for me personally to turn off the buzzes when engaging in serious study.

The next consideration is the wise posting of content. Facebook’s
ability to connect with someone is a blessing and a curse. Much can be
learned about a new friend by reading their profile, which allows you to
absorb information very quickly. In many cases this can be great. You
can view and share pictures from vacations or important moments in life.
However, this carries with it a subversive effect. You can now read
about someone’s life in an afternoon. This ability lowers the desire to
engage in real social interactions. Why go through possible awkward
moments meeting someone when I can voyeuristically learn about their
life and engage in asynchronous text communication on my schedule?

While I cannot control what other people do or say on their Facebook
accounts, it is still essential to act wisely about what I post.
Personally, this means refraining from posting every little detail and
picture, choosing instead to leave some things offline. In a way, my
posts on Facebook could function as an invitation to come and
participate in real life with me. This is where the lecture connected
back with my musings. It affirmed that social interaction should never
replace real and actual communication with another person.

In conclusion, hiding from social media is simply not the right path to
take for someone involved in ministry. The role of a minister is to
spread the Word and to connect it with the hearts of men. Avoiding
social media in 2014 is akin to avoiding the printing press or the use
of the postal system, it is folly. This leaves us to consider how to
wisely use social media. Controlling our frequency and our content are
the two ways we can master social media without letting it master us. In
the end, we have to keep in mind that social media can help us initiate
conversations that will hopefully continue in coffee shops and around
our dinner tables.

Careful Timekeeper
==================

This section explores the dangers of time and how it should be managed
effectively. The right perspective on time is crucial for someone
involved in the ministry, where the demand seems to far outweigh the
supply.

The dangers of time are indeed many in a time when people can be
sandwiched between the polemics of workaholism and outright laziness.
The minister is especially vulnerable to both extremes. The trend to
workaholism can simply be the desire to accomplish more played out over
months and years until time with family and friends is almost
nonexistent. Conversely, laziness can be a temptation when there is no
one to watch over the minister’s shoulder to make sure that time is
being used efficiently.

The lecture focused on ways in which we can squander, stretch, or
squeeze time. I found that the temptation to stretch time was very
personally convicting. On my computer sits a plan for the whole semester
with time targets for most of the assignments. While this is a
worthwhile tool, it also makes it easier to stretch time during the day.
An example would be a paper that needs to get researched and written. It
can be easy to prolong the actual completion of the assignment on a
specific day knowing that it doesn’t need to be done until the end of
the day. If there are no other pressing time commitments, it creates
space for procrastination to occur. Fortunately, these deadlines have
been set ahead of the real due dates so that the assignments are never
late. But how can this system be improved?

Reflection on this problem produced a clear answer that was related to
the lecture – set working hours. The solution is to treat study hours
the same as if being a seminary student was an actual job. To “clock in”
and “clock out” on study time seems counterintuitive at first. What if a
particular assignment wasn’t completed that day? However, the reason
this is likely to work is because we accomplish more under deadlines
then we do under lackadaisical and open-ended due dates. Simply, if I
have all day on Saturday to write an assignment, it will likely take all
day. If in contrast I set a deadline of 3pm, then it could be
accomplished by then and the rest of the day would be free to do other
tasks or have a break. The practical step here is to put blocks on the
calendar for study time and actually adhere to those scheduled blocks.

The lecture moved from discussing the dangers of time to thinking about
how it should be managed effectively. The first step listed here was not
planning (as would be expected in any secular conversation), but peace!
Morning devotions was listed as an essential part of every day. I could
not agree more. The days that are the hardest to get anything done are
often the days that started off with a certain task or emergency that
pulled away from devotional time.

The next step listed in the lecture was to plan out the day. One of the
points was that you should only have one to-do list as a master list of
tasks. While this may be ideal in most situations, I have found it to be
extremely difficult. How tasks are organized depend on how a particular
person functions and plans. Personally, I like to view things visually
in order to have a picture of the “weight of the day”. Most tasks
managers are either focused on tickboxes or on how things should be
displayed on a calendar. It is extremely rare that one program possesses
both. This is likely due to the different methodologies that are
employed, such as David Allen’s Getting Things Done[^4]. My current
system is to use two separate task managers: TeamGantt and Todoist. The
first program allows for a bird’s eye view of the entire semester and
makes it easy to stack and separate all classwork assignments so that
the load is evenly distributed. The second program allows me to quickly
input random tasks such as renewing car registration, paying a
particular bill, or replying to a long email. The combination of these
two programs has helped to ensure that both short and long-term tasks
are captured.

The lecture covered next that it is also appropriate to pick the right
time for the right tasks. The recent time management assignment helped
to call attention to not only how my time was spent on various tasks,
but *when* a particular task was undertaken. It led me to discover that
between 3:30 and 5:00pm was for me the most effective time to undertake
writing projects. It seems this time is when the after-lunch sleepiness
starts to wear off and mental acuity is regained before dinner time.
Before this time my mental energy is drained in classroom sessions,
while after dinner it seems to slip away in the hustle and bustle of the
evening. Establishing this helps to bring awareness of when other tasks
can be completed that require minimal energy. Tasks such as checking
email, updating the budget, paying bills, and replying to social media
can be done in the late evening hours before going to bed. Programs such
as Buffer allow you to schedule posts on social media so that you can
still be “active” during the day even when absent.

It is worth noting that the lecture also placed emphasis on exercising
as a way to, in effect, create time. This is due to the effect of
exercise on enhancing mental acuity and awareness. With these increased
levels of capacity, it is possible to get more done in a day and come as
close as humanly possible to producing more time. Although you can
budget it the same way, time differs from money in that you cannot earn
more. Working with what he have each day is the only control we have
upon time.

The final point of discussion in the lecture was the contrast between
the Well-planned life and the Summoned life. The former is a life that
is well thought out in terms of overall purpose, while the latter is
someone who responds to the changing circumstances as the years slip by.
The concept of the well-planned life was easy for me to grasp because it
is already a natural outflowing of my personality. However, one of the
most valuable personal lessons in recent years is that the desire to
plan must not accompany the desire to control circumstances. Planning
sets a course, but the actual events of the future are covered by God’s
sovereignty. Not all things go according to plan, and the one who
desires to lead a well-planned life must account for this and not be
afraid.

In conclusion, the proper management of time is one of the most
important disciplines for a Christian to undertake. We owe all our lives
to our Creator, and we will one day give account to Him for how we have
spent our lives. Starting each day with the peaceful connection to God
and planning our priorities according to His will are what allow us to
orient each day around Him. Armed with this knowledge, we then face the
day with a future in mind while holding our hands open to whatever God
might decide to give to us or take from us.

The Sleeping Baby
=================

This section explores reflections on the causes & effects of sleep
deprivation, and its cure. The temptation to neglect sleep due to
ministry priorities is common, but fatal. An incorrect theology of work
and rest leads us to walk closer to the grave, something that likely
brings the devil great pleasure.

The lecture listed several causes for sleep deprivation. Three things
from the list stood out personally: irregularity, workaholism, and
anxiety. The first semester of seminary is notoriously rough. This first
exposure to theological concepts at a graduate level can be daunting.
Coming home from a day of class with mental fuel drained to the dregs
and then sitting down to do homework seems near impossible on some days.
However, the irregularity that can come from this routine causes even
more damage over both the near-term and long-term. In the near-term,
this irregularity can cause lapses in memory of both classwork and
personal conversations with loved ones. In the long-term, major health
issues can arise that leave the leader crippled in many ways.
Establishing a regular sleep pattern is essential to long-term health
and ministry usefulness.

The second cause of workaholism is personally related to the cause of
irregularity. It can be easy to point the finger at class assignments
and workload and shift the blame somewhere else. However, at the end of
the day, God has provided ample time to complete all that He has
required of us. The workaholic attitude to do more at the expense of
sleep is not driven by a lack of time, but rather by a *mismanagement*
of time. The work in a week is not achieved by sacrificing sleep, it is
achieved by doing what we are responsible for during the time we have in
the day. If these tasks are too much for us, we are either taking on
more than God asked of us, or we are not efficient with the
opportunities He has provided.

The issue of anxiety is one that resonates deeply. Gazing upon the
workload ahead can at times drive us to paralysis in the present. We see
the mountain before us and forget that it is ascended only by taking one
step in front of the other. Unfortunately, this anxiety not only
cripples us during the day, it haunts us at night as well. We toss and
turn under the covers, our subconscious wrestling with the affairs of
the day and fearful of the future. It is important both at the beginning
and the *end* of the day to focus our attention on God, knowing that He
both forgives our misuse of time and watches over our sleep.

What then is the cure to all of these ills? It is a correct theology of
sleep. The lecture hones in on this remedy by stating several things
that God reminds us of while we engage in rest. Paying attention to
these cues helps us to view our work and rest with healthy balance. The
most salient points were that sleep reminds us we are unnecessary, and
that we are called to trust Him. Sleeplessness can so often result from
the fear of not getting enough done, but underlying this fear is the
belief that we are extremely important. These things that we worry about
are ultimately not in our domain of control but in God’s. We fear that
things will come crashing down tomorrow, forgetting that God has already
planned our steps for tomorrow. We rob ourselves of the peace that rest
was meant to lead us to. The question we must now answer is “Will we
trust him?”

In conclusion, our incorrect theology of sleep causes our workaholism
and anxiety to rob us of the rest that Jesus has won for us. The proper
view that God is sovereign over our days is not something to be merely
acknowledged, but believed. Faith that God still has control when we
enter rest will be rewarded by the peaceful sleep that only the
righteous truly know.

The Efficient Administrator
===========================

This section focuses on the barriers and blueprints to organization. One
of the most helpful aspects of this lecture was the focus on what
prevents us from organizing things well.

The session discussed various ways in which both we and others can
prevent ourselves from being effective. The section on “Changes”
highlighted that changes in housing, jobs, kids, or computers can
sometimes hamper us. This has over the past week been a personal
challenge to look ahead at where technology is going and anticipate an
organizational system that will keep up with the future. What better
time than seminary to prepare and sharpen the tools in the toolbox.
Unfortunately, it does take a large amount of time to sift through the
myriad of tools for sorting electronic information, but this was a
fruitful endeavor in the end. A combination of Google Apps, Evernote,
Todoist, and Dropbox seems to work well for organizing information. The
real benefit to these tools is that they are not tied to any one device.

With the barrier to changes now overcome, it was important to think
through a blueprint of how things should be organized. The discussion on
Bill Lawrence’s TRASH system was helpful, along with the famous GTD
System by David Allen. Both systems recognize that tasks that come in
should be quickly sorted and off of the mind as soon as possible. We
live in an age where a firehose of tasks and information flies at us
constantly. If it is an option to get things off of our plate that are
not necessary than this should indeed be the first step. This
information radically changes the approach to email. Some changes made
over the past week were to connect e-mail to a task management app so
that items can be transferred over seamlessly and inbox zero is a more
realistic goal. Turning off email notifications also helped to free up
portions of the day for more intense study.

In summary, the focus on barriers and blueprints in the lecture drove
consideration for a better way to organize workflow. Taking the time to
research proven methodologies has already paid dividends in increased
productivity.

The Respected Chairman
======================

Presiding over a meeting seems to be an inevitability for those involved
in pastoral ministry. Given this reality, what is the proper etiquette
for conducting meetings to the Glory of God? This section considers the
proper posture of a chairman.

The lecture mentioned several aspects of the fruit of the Spirit that
are necessary for meetings, including patience and the seeking of unity.
The hard balance the leader has to strike is between getting things
accomplished and showing the love of Christ. It is possible for a
meeting to be extremely productive and ungodly. It is also possible for
a meeting to be a wasted social hour. The proper balance starts with the
motivation by the leader to honor God in all things. It is for this
reason that prayer should cover the before, during, and after of the
meeting. Prayer before a meeting shows that the chairman is thinking of
how Christ would be honored as His saints are planning to meet with one
another. Starting the meeting with prayer communicates to the saints
that they are not at the meeting to accomplish worldly or selfish goals
but heavenly ones. Prayer after the meeting has the goal of smoothing
out disagreements and promoting the unity of the body.

In Conclusion, prayer is perhaps the most important hallmark of a
well-respected chairman. Many other concepts discussed in the lecture
were important, but prayer sets the stage for God’s work to be
accomplished through God’s appointed means.

The Bull-loving Matador
=======================

This section reflects upon how to prepare for and recover from
criticism. The lecture began with a discussion on spiritual preparation,
warning in particular of the dangers of pride. A helpful addition to
this section is that we can receive legitimate criticism both from being
overconfident and *underconfident*. In some of these cases, the
Christian leader might not receive criticism at all, except behind his
back. While pride causes him to speak words he shouldn’t, the fear of
man can cause him to not speak the words he should. This is why the
leader must be focused solely on what God’s judgment of him is, and not
what any man would say. This position that only what God says is true
with absolute certainty allows the Christian leader to have a right
perspective on the criticism that is received. This framework allows the
filtering of critiques into legitimate and illegitimate categories and
can help provide balance to critical comments.

When received, criticism should be handled with grace. In addition to
the immediate response, there is the period of recovery. No one likes to
be taken down a notch or two. We all feel like things are going alright
until someone makes a comment against us. The lecture did mention that
we should not become a people-pleaser, responding to every whim and
fancy of our critics. Taken to its natural end, this position would
leave us without any definite platform on which to speak from, and our
message would be lost. In addition to the lecture’s focus on praying and
doing good to the other person, it is prudent also to pray for yourself.
Pray that God would open your eyes to the identity that both you and the
critic enjoy in Christ. This will help to refocus the desire for oneness
with Christ and unity of the body.

In conclusion, critique will always come to the one who tries to achieve
anything of importance. How criticism is addressed will greatly impact
how well a ministry performs over the long term. Left to his own
devices, man’s pride blocks his own progress in the faith. With
prayerful focus on our received identity from God we are strengthened
and encouraged to forgive our critics.

The Just Judge
==============

This section focuses on a few of the benefits of exercising church
discipline. The lecture mentioned briefly that the main benefit of
church discipline is that the loaf of the church would not be leavened
with sin, and that repentance is the ultimate aim. Acknowledging this
truth, there are several other benefits to the church community. Among
these benefits are: experiential communication of the Gospel,
appreciation of the covenant community, and celebration of the means of
grace.

First and foremost, church discipline communicates the seriousness of
sin and its result in death. It is in these circumstances that the
Gospel is made visible within the community. Church members see the
justice of God and the compassion of God upon one of their own. What
better way to display the Gospel in real life?

Secondly, believers grow in appreciation for the covenant community.
They see that this is done out of deep love. This love is completely
foreign to the uncaring ways of the world. The world says “Do what you
want, it doesn’t matter”. Church discipline says “Jesus love you enough
to correct your path”.

Lastly, church discipline celebrates the means of grace. To a genuine
believer, the denial of access to the Lord’s Table causes grief. He
desires to return to celebrate God’s provision in Christ. This drives
him to repent and be restored to full participation, and also reminds
the community at large of the benefits they enjoy in worship.

In conclusion, the positive effects of church discipline are
far-reaching. Not only are offenders strengthened in the faith, but the
broader church community is as well. Church discipline provides a
natural outworking of the Gospel into the believing community so that it
is made even more visible and real.

Conclusion
==========

In summary, there are three important components for the Christian
leader to keep in mind at all times: vision of the mission of God,
development of character, and implementation of balance. These three
things are important to continually assess and return to.

An accurate vision of the building of God’s kingdom is essential to the
leader because he needs to be reminded frequently that he is not
building his own kingdom, he is helping to build God’s. This helps the
leader practically not to place two much emphasis on his own efforts. On
the days he achieves much, he realizes it is all for God’s glory. On the
days he achieves little, he is reminded that God has still utilized his
efforts. In the days he is overwhelmed, he knows that God provides
strength.

As he serves God, the leader develops his own character. Instead of
viewing the low points of ministry as abandonment by God, he views them
as ways in which God is shaping him. The leader knows that not only is
he a leader, he is also a Christian. He strives to model the faith to
those that are under his charge. The leader is aware that God will use
his character to speak more loudly than words ever will.

At the end, the leader considers his life in view of God’s purposes and
strives for balance. He knows that God will provide enough time, enough
resources, and enough energy to accomplish the task set before him. He
knows that God has not given him a spirit of fear, but of power. With
prayerful dependence upon the Holy Spirit, looking to Jesus, the leader
seeks to glorify the Father.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Allen, David. *Getting things done: the art of stress-free
productivity*. New York: Penguin Books, 2001.

Mohler, R. Albert. *The conviction to lead: 25 principles for leadership
that matters*. Minneapolis, Minn: Bethany House, 2012.

Sanders, J. Oswald. In *Spiritual leadership*, 118. Commitment to
spiritual growth series. Chicago: Moody Press, 1994.

[^1]: . R. Albert Mohler, *The conviction to lead: 25 principles for
    leadership that matters* (Minneapolis, Minn: Bethany House, 2012).

[^2]: . J. Oswald Sanders, in *Spiritual leadership*, Commitment to
    spiritual growth series (Chicago: Moody Press, 1994), 118.

[^3]: . Mohler, *The conviction to lead*.

[^4]: . David Allen, *Getting things done: the art of stress-free
    productivity* (New York: Penguin Books, 2001).
