Puritan Reformed Theological Seminary

**Contrasting Views of Fatherhood**

Joshua Lamb

Modern Church History

October 31, 2016

Introduction
============

There is no mistaking that gender role within marriage is undergoing a
massive shift in our society. The “traditional” view of a male-led
household has faced growing opposition, both in and out of the church.
The advancement of feminism has caused our society to take a new look at
the marriage relationship and how it should be structured. How did this
shift come about? What are the dominant views competing for acceptance?
What does it mean for the church today? These are the questions we seek
to answer in comparing American conservative and liberal evangelical
views of the role of men within marriage. We aim to study fatherhood as
it has been viewed by these two groups in America from the 1960s until
present day. We claim that the conservative viewpoint is the closest to
Scripture and the most thorough in providing practical guidance for the
operation of families.

Historical Sketch
=================

Setting up our examination, we must first look at how the culture at
large has developed its thinking of marriage. This sketch starts during
the 1960s with the advent of second-wave feminism. One of the biggest
changes to families occurred in the 1960s through the passing of
no-fault divorce laws[^1]. This represented a major shift in the
cultural view of marriage – from “until death do us part” to a
commitment of a temporary nature. Pastor Al Mohler interprets this as
the changing of marriage from *covenant* to *contract*[^2]. The idea of
an underlying and abiding commitment between spouses began to erode in
American culture. Along with this, there was a shift taking place in the
workforce, with more women seeking entry into law, medicine, and other
professional occupations[^3]. This was in large part catalyzed by
feminist works such as the infamous *Feminine Mystique* by Betty
Friedan, which was published in 1963 and argued for women’s expanded
involvement in the public sphere[^4]. The enlightenment ideals of
“freedom, equality, and privacy” began seeping their way into the
marriage relationship[^5]. Thus, there was a decreasing view of
responsibility to fulfill a defined gender role, replaced by an
increasing view that self-fulfillment is more important. Within
Christian circles, Valerie Saiving challenged what she referred to as
the “split view of Christian ethics”[^6]. By this she meant that the
traditional characterization of men in the marketplace and women at home
should not be assumed.

The trends continued along the same lines in the 1970s, with the notable
existence of two feminist camps: the *humanists* who emphasized
similarities between genders, and the *relationalists* who emphasized
the unique caring capacity of women[^7]. There was a simple goal to
reach a certain equality between the sexes. Social science research on
fatherhood began at this time because of two reasons: a notable increase
in the rate of divorce, and the uptick in children born out of
wedlock[^8]. 1973 saw the tragic establishment of *Roe v Wade*, which
allowed even *married women* to choose to abort children without consent
of the husband[^9]. From a legal viewpoint, this effectively placed
birth decisions in the hands of the mother alone. Even the present day
continues to be affected by this legislation. Birth control also
increased during this time with the use of the contraceptive pill.
Mohler comments here as well, stating that the pill created a
“contraceptive mentality”[^10]. Women were now allowed to abort children
that were unwanted as well as take steps to prevent conception. One can
easily interpret these trends as causing a diminished view of the role
and authority of fathers in the home. Women were making increasingly
independent decisions, and were able to lean on national and state laws
for support.

The 1980s saw a shift from the rhetoric of simple equality, to a
confrontation with the institutions that were said to be devaluing women
and their contribution to society[^11]. The question “which is our
greatest enemy: men or capitalism?” began to split feminist groups along
different lines of thinking[^12]. Wives during this period of American
history wanted to have all of the doors of opportunity open to them. It
was about the freedom to work full time, homemake fulltime, or any
combination of options. The institution of marriage itself took a
massive hit when the *Uniform Marriage and Divorce Act of 1987* defined
marriage as a “personal relationship”[^13]. Nietzsche’s prediction that
the western family would be “slowly ground into a collection of
individuals” rang true[^14]. This was a death knell for the idea of
covenant in American society. For all intents and purposes, marriage
increasingly began to be viewed as utilitarian.

The 1990s represented another shift in feminist thinking as academic
institutions began to tout the banner that morality was a social
construct created by repressive authorities[^15]. They claimed that
women needed to fight for liberation from these institutions. No doubt
the church was seen front and center as an institution of repression.
Sociologist Susan Barash also notes that women during this period began
delaying marriage, from the median of 20 years old in the 1950s to 24.5
years in the 1990s[^16]. These trends have only continued into the
2000s, with many sociological factors including the rise of pornography
– which have caused men to delay marriage as well.

In summary, there is an increasing trend from the 1960s to the present
which views married women as increasingly autonomous in both home and
the workplace. It is in this societal context that we study the
conservative orthodox and liberal views of fatherhood.

Orthodox Viewpoint
==================

We now turn to examine the views that have held sway in the church
during the period of our study. The orthodox view (also called
“complementarian”) contends that the original Scriptural pattern for
husbands and wives has not changed since God’s revelation, and indeed
will continue to remain the same. In Mohler’s interpretation, Scripture
defines marriage as a covenant that reflects God’s covenant love in
Jesus Christ to the church[^17]. As such it is a permanent and binding
relationship in which the individuals are not considered autonomous, but
rather as one flesh. The physiological, biological, mental, and
temperamental changes between the genders are considered to be God’s
design that they would function differently, especially in family life.
Thus, fathers are viewed as having the status “head of household”.
Orthodox believers claim that this view is the one shared by Christ, the
Apostle Paul, and ultimately is God’s design for humanity.

### Father’s Position

The father is placed in the role of leadership over the family. This is
especially true in regards to spiritual leadership (1 Cor 11:3)[^18].
The father is given the ultimate responsibility for the welfare and
provision of his family in every regard, not only over children, but
also for his wife (Eph 5:23)[^19]. This is not to give men free reign to
domineer his family, but rather has the spiritual goal of showing forth
the Trinitarian nature of God[^20]. Orthodox believers also do not
believe that the father is the highest authority, but the he himself is
subjected to God and also to the oversight of the church. Thus, there is
a Scriptural connection between headship at home and in the church[^21].
Finally, the orthodox hold that the headship of a man is not something
that is contested in the sphere of religion because it is recorded in
the Bible as a fact – that is, men are not *supposed* to be the head of
a household but *are* the head of a household[^22].

### Father’s Responsibilities

It is out of this position as head that the father has certain tasks
that he is responsible for. The orthodox view has never held that men
are the unrivaled kings of their home, with no accountability or weight
of responsibility, but rather that they hold a serious and sober role in
reflecting Christ’s relationship to His church. Thus, fathers most of
all are to love their wives and children sacrificially[^23]. Fathers are
to exhort, comfort, and lead their children in the fear and admonition
of the Lord[^24]. Fathers must initiate both spiritually and physically
to guide their family as a shepherd, a CEO, a ship captain etc. They are
to take ultimate responsibility for the smooth ordering of their home.
This doesn’t mean that a father does everything in the family, neither
does it mean he delegates everything. It means that he is ultimately
responsible and accountable for the life of his family.

### Orthodox View of Historical Changes

The orthodox view of fatherhood has not seen much historical development
(and they regard this as a good thing). This duration is acknowledged
freely by liberal Christians as well because it is used in rhetoric
which condemns the “longstanding patriarchal establishment”. John Witte
argues that from infancy the western tradition has viewed marriage in
four perpectives: mutual contract, spiritual association, social estate,
and natural institution[^25]. Wayne Grudem notes that it wasn’t until
the last half of the 20^th^ century that women’s roles in the church
shifted[^26]. Taken in the scope of church history this is really a
staggering development. For thousands of years, the role of men and
women in the church was largely traditional. Only in the last 60+ years
has this taken a drastic turn. Historically, one of the most significant
responses to feminism was the *Danvers Statement on Biblical Manhood and
Womenhood* which was published in 1987 as a response to evangelical
feminism[^27]. Complementarian groups typically split into 1 point or 2
point complementarians – the difference being whether they support male
headship in the home and church, or simply the church[^28]. A complaint
from orthodox leaders has been the lack of teaching in the church
regarding the traditional understanding of male headship[^29].

Liberal Viewpoint
=================

The liberal viewpoint (also called egalitarianism) has in many ways
followed the cultural advent of feminism. This view espouses many of the
same principles as the broader culture in pushing for “women’s
liberation” from cultural institutions. They argue that male patriarchy
has dominated Christianity and that it need not continue to be so.
According to this view, both fathers and mothers are to be the same in
authority. Much of this view can be summarized in the term
*equal-regard* originating from Don S. Browning, who was the head of the
*Marriage, Culture, and Family Project*. Liberals believe that male
patriarchy is a relic of the past, that was treated in Scripture the
same way slavery was – as a necessary part of that society which could
be thrown off when culture was ready to walk forward[^30].

### Father’s Position

The fathers position is one similar to the mother, in that both are
equal partakers of the divine mandate to “be fruitful and multiply” from
Genesis 1:28. This “ontology of equality” is said to be in existence
from the days of Adam and Eve until now. Some take it further to mean
that this equal-regard principle is linked to the commandment to love
neighbor as oneself[^31]. The position of the father is still recognized
as vital, but it is to serve the sociological assertion that children
need the influences of both the father and the mother[^32]. The
importance of the father seems to be acknowledged, but then marginalized
due to the view that the mother feels the imperative to care for the
family more than the father[^33].

### Father’s Responsibilities

The responsibilities of a father are not as clearly defined in liberal
Christianity, due to the principle of equal regard. Some put forth the
idea that the division of labor along gender lines should revolve around
altruism[^34]. Practically that means that whoever is best suited to do
a particular task for the sake of the family should be the one
responsible for it. If men are better at the budget or at changing
diapers, then they should be responsible for those areas. Liberal
Christians argue that household responsibilities should not be thought
of in terms of gender distinction, but in terms of the household as a
whole, which allows for different ways that responsibilities can be
divided up[^35]. In feminist language, the family should operate on a
“mutual covenant for interdependence and individuation of both
partners”[^36]. This often means that both father and mother participate
in the public and private spheres of life – both working outside the
home and participating in child-rearing. Both the father and mother are
responsible for an *agape* love which is “mutual, passionate, deeply
interested, and unconditional”[^37]. Lastly, the liberal Christian ideal
is to move beyond family as a social structure into the conception of
the family of God. We must not operate in the realm of family
responsibilities in the end, but rather on the broader spiritual family
that we have as Christians[^38].

### Liberal View of Historical Changes

The historical changes in the liberal view are closely tied to the
development of feminism in the broader society. Liberal Christians
strongly identify feminist theology as arising from “experiences of
oppression”[^39]. Thus, Christian feminists view married women as a
long-oppressed group that was held in the bonds of male patriarchy. They
believe that the conception of self-sacrifice was a tool used to
subjugate women into a certain societal role[^40]. This was defined
sharply by Barbara Kilkert Andolsen in 1980 when she stated that
Christian self-sacrifice really turns into women serving *for* men[^41].
As feminism continued to advance in society, the role of women in the
church began to be questioned. In 1987 a group assembled out of the
frustration that women were not allowed in ministry and began publishing
the *Priscilla Papers*. These articles led to the establishment of
“Christians for Biblical Equality” which was created in January of 1988
and espouses egalitarian principles.

Many changes took place in the later half of the twentieth century,
including: the increase in female seminary professors, gender-neutral
language in liturgy and Bible translations, increased publication in
support of feminist Christianity, women’s gender studies in schools, and
greater awareness of sexual and domestic violence[^42].

Christian feminism today is divided between two groups of thought:
*liberal monism* which focuses on our generic humanness, and *romantic
dualism* which focuses on the yin and yang of masculinity and
femininity. However, the current trend is to leave these conceptions
behind and simply think of our “relatedness” as human beings. Rather
than gender definition, we are to define ourselves by the love we must
give to the people around us[^43].

Orthodox Critique of Liberalism
===============================

Having seen the two viewpoints and their development, we now turn to the
criticism of each viewpoint. The Orthodox view does not regard itself to
be oppressive and patriarchal, but rather points to Scripture as
establishing a set pattern for how the home should operate. The liberal
view caves to cultural pressure when it asserts that women in marriage
should be equated with the slavery and subjugation of peoples in western
history. Male headship is not designed to be ominous and oppressive, but
rather to be a life-giving and wonderful picture of Christ and the
church.

The orthodox also views the lack of headship in the liberal view as
being unrealistic and impractical. All of society has clearly defined
roles. There is always a principle of headship operating in business,
politics etc. and to assume that the family operates differently is
ignorant. Structure is necessary for the governing of affairs in every
society and institution. Without it, there is an increase in conflict
and miscommunication. Marriage is hard enough as it is without having to
resort to a “choose your own adventure” model of family life – where all
the roles and responsibilities are interchangeable.

Finally, the Scriptures set forth the principle that fathers are given
the ultimate responsibility for their household. To work against this
(as liberalism does) is to create a scenario where men are in sin
because they are abdicating a clearly defined ordinance of God. We
cannot take away the responsibility that God places in the hand of
people and replace it with something of our own conception. If the
liberal view espouses “love of neighbor” then it should take seriously
the fact that minimizing fatherhood results in men being led into sinful
error to give to others what they alone are tasked with.

Liberal Critique of Orthodoxy
=============================

The liberal criticism of orthodoxy centers around the view that male
headship invariably leads to oppression and abuse. If the load of
leadership is shared among the husband and a wife, then their position
is equal and he therefore views her as a partner, rather than a servant
under him. Some also claim that the concept of the “breadwinner husband”
stems from the necessities of the industrial revolution, not from the
New Testament[^44].

Liberals also believe that orthodox Christians do not share their vision
of Adam and Eve being given joint and equal dominion over creation in
Genesis[^45]. They argue that the female responsibility in this has been
minimized in society but that it is given an equal footing to men in the
Bible.

Lastly, they believe that the Orthodox group is missing the reality of
the priesthood of all believers when prioritizing the earthly
family[^46].

Practical Guidance
==================

The church needs to take seriously the debate that takes place among the
pews. These competing viewpoints are fighting for prominence. Can male
headship be recognized as fundamental in family and church life? There
are five takeaways from this historical issue:

Firstly, we must return to a Scriptural understanding of male-female
relationships in marriage. Both the Orthodox and Liberal camps claim the
name of Christ. If that is true, we must look to Christ’s Word to guide
us, recognizing and putting aside the cultural bias that we bring to the
Bible when we read it. We must be brave enough to look into the Word and
obey the principles that it gives us, even if they sound out of place in
a modern context. We are pilgrims here and citizens of heaven, and must
obey heaven’s laws first and foremost.

Secondly, our view of relationships must be eschatological. The liberal
view falls far short in recognizing the Christ-church principle of
headship. That is, male headship is given *above all else* to display
Christ’s love for the church. This must inform our understanding of
headship and submission as being foundational to displaying the activity
and intent of God on the earth. Fathers should be convicted by this
benchmark, and wives should view it as a wonderful encouragement.

Thirdly, there are a select few principles espoused by liberal
Christians which should be thoughtfully heard and perhaps implemented.
One example is Don Browning’s 60-hour workweek. The goal of this
proposal is that husbands and wives do not exceed a combined total of 60
hours per week in public endeavors, so that they can spend the rest of
the time at home[^47]. This does much to curb workaholism and encourage
involvement from fathers in the household.

Fourthly, men are to view their wives in as near a kinship as possible.
The liberal complaint that wives are subjugated or treated as servants
must be acknowledged. While it is not a reason to throw out the biblical
notion of male headship, it is enough to warn us to be wary of abuses
within the church. A holistic view of the marriage relationship needs to
be frequently taught in churches, to prevent men from abdicating on the
one hand and being domineering on the other hand.

Fifthly, we must view the family as being a “little church”. Liberal
Christians seek to remove God-ordained distinctions when they press the
priesthood of all believers to mean that we lightly regard our physical
families. We are not lightly to regard our families, but rather we are
to use them in such a way as to bless the church and the world.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Archer, Trevor. *Men of God*. The Good Book Company, 2011.

Barash, Susan Shapiro. *The New Wife: The Evolving Role of the American
Wife*. Lenexa, Kan.: Nonetheless Press, 2004.

Browning, Don S. *Equality and the Family: A Fundamental, Practical
Theology of Children, Mothers, and Fathers, in Modern Societies*. Grand
Rapids, Mich: Eerdmans, 2006.

Carr, Anne, and Mary Stewart Van Leeuwen. *Religion, Feminism, and the
Family*. 1st edition. Louisville, Ky: Westminster John Knox Press, 1996.

Crotts, John H. *Mighty Men: The Starter’s Guide to Leading Your
Family*. Sand Springs, Okla.: Grace & Truth Books, 2000.

Fisher, G. W., and Charles Wesley. *A father’s threefold ministry*.
Charlotte, NC: Fundamental Presbyterian Publications, 19.

Grudem, Wayne A. *Evangelical feminism & biblical truth: an analysis of
more than one hundred disputed questions*. Sisters, Or: Multnomah
Publishers, 2004.

Jr, John G. Stackhouse. *Finally Feminist: A Pragmatic Christian
Understanding of Gender*. Grand Rapids, Mich: Baker Academic, 2005.

Jr, R. Albert Mohler. *We Cannot Be Silent: Speaking Truth to a Culture
Redefining Sex, Marriage, and the Very Meaning of Right and Wrong*.
Nashville, Tennessee: Thomas Nelson, 2015.

Piper, John. *Recovering Biblical Manhood and Womanhood Publisher:
Crossway Books*, n.d.

Rigney, Joe. *The Things of Earth: Treasuring God by Enjoying His
Gifts*. Wheaton, Illinois: Crossway, 2014.

Strauch, Alexander. *Men and Women, Equal Yet Different: A Brief Study
of the Biblical Passages on Gender*. 36332nd edition. Littleton, Colo.:
Lewis & Roth Publishers, 1999.

Terrell, JoAnne Marie. *Power in the Blood? The Cross in the African
American Experience*. Eugene, Ore.: Wipf & Stock Pub, 2005.

Tipton, Steven M. *Family Transformed: Religion, Values, and Society in
American Life*. Edited by Steven M. Tipton and John Witte Jr. Georgetown
University Press, 2005.

West, Robin. *Caring for Justice*. New York: NYU Press, 1999.

[^1]: Steven M. Tipton, *Family Transformed: Religion, Values, and
    Society in American Life*, ed by. Steven M. Tipton and John Witte Jr
    (Georgetown University Press, 2005), 144.

[^2]: R. Albert Mohler Jr, *We Cannot Be Silent: Speaking Truth to a
    Culture Redefining Sex, Marriage, and the Very Meaning of Right and
    Wrong* (Nashville, Tennessee: Thomas Nelson, 2015), 23.

[^3]: Susan Shapiro Barash, *The New Wife: The Evolving Role of the
    American Wife* (Lenexa, Kan.: Nonetheless Press, 2004), 122–123.

[^4]: Anne Carr and Mary Stewart Van Leeuwen, *Religion, Feminism, and
    the Family*, 1st edition. (Louisville, Ky: Westminster John Knox
    Press, 1996), 34.

[^5]: Tipton, *Family Transformed*, 257.

[^6]: Carr and Van Leeuwen, *Religion, Feminism, and the Family*, 27.

[^7]: Tipton, *Family Transformed*, 75.

[^8]: Tipton, *Family Transformed*, 157.

[^9]: Tipton, *Family Transformed*, 259.

[^10]: Jr, *We Cannot Be Silent*, 89.

[^11]: Carr and Van Leeuwen, *Religion, Feminism, and the Family*, 15.

[^12]: Barash, *The New Wife*, 150.

[^13]: Tipton, *Family Transformed*, 257.

[^14]: Tipton, *Family Transformed*, 244.

[^15]: Jr, *We Cannot Be Silent*, 13.

[^16]: Barash, *The New Wife*, 183.

[^17]: Jr, *We Cannot Be Silent*, 103.

[^18]: John H. Crotts, *Mighty Men: The Starter’s Guide to Leading Your
    Family* (Sand Springs, Okla.: Grace & Truth Books, 2000), 1–2.

[^19]: Trevor Archer, *Men of God* (The Good Book Company, 2011), 52.

[^20]: Joe Rigney, *The Things of Earth: Treasuring God by Enjoying His
    Gifts* (Wheaton, Illinois: Crossway, 2014), 172.

[^21]: Wayne A. Grudem, *Evangelical feminism & biblical truth: an
    analysis of more than one hundred disputed questions* (Sisters, Or:
    Multnomah Publishers, 2004), 80.

[^22]: Alexander Strauch, *Men and Women, Equal Yet Different: A Brief
    Study of the Biblical Passages on Gender*, 36332nd edition.
    (Littleton, Colo.: Lewis & Roth Publishers, 1999), 56–57.

[^23]: Archer, *Men of God*, 70.

[^24]: G. W. Fisher and Charles Wesley, *A father’s threefold ministry*
    (Charlotte, NC: Fundamental Presbyterian Publications, 19), 4,5,8.

[^25]: Tipton, *Family Transformed*, 245.

[^26]: Grudem, *Evangelical feminism & biblical truth*, 82.

[^27]: Grudem, *Evangelical feminism & biblical truth*, 537.

[^28]: Grudem, *Evangelical feminism & biblical truth*, 518–19.

[^29]: John Piper, *Recovering Biblical Manhood and Womanhood Publisher:
    Crossway Books*, n.d., x.

[^30]: John G. Stackhouse Jr, *Finally Feminist: A Pragmatic Christian
    Understanding of Gender* (Grand Rapids, Mich: Baker Academic, 2005),
    42.

[^31]: Tipton, *Family Transformed*, 155,174.

[^32]: Tipton, *Family Transformed*, 190.

[^33]: Robin West, *Caring for Justice* (New York: NYU Press, 1999),
    117–18.

[^34]: Tipton, *Family Transformed*, 74.

[^35]: Jr, *Finally Feminist*, 91.

[^36]: Carr and Van Leeuwen, *Religion, Feminism, and the Family*, 108.

[^37]: Carr and Van Leeuwen, *Religion, Feminism, and the Family*, 115.

[^38]: Carr and Van Leeuwen, *Religion, Feminism, and the Family*, 378.

[^39]: Carr and Van Leeuwen, *Religion, Feminism, and the Family*, 24.

[^40]: JoAnne Marie Terrell, *Power in the Blood? The Cross in the
    African American Experience* (Eugene, Ore.: Wipf & Stock Pub, 2005),
    34,124.

[^41]: Carr and Van Leeuwen, *Religion, Feminism, and the Family*, 27.

[^42]: Carr and Van Leeuwen, *Religion, Feminism, and the Family*, 30.

[^43]: Carr and Van Leeuwen, *Religion, Feminism, and the Family*,
    106–107.

[^44]: Don S. Browning, *Equality and the Family: A Fundamental,
    Practical Theology of Children, Mothers, and Fathers, in Modern
    Societies* (Grand Rapids, Mich: Eerdmans, 2006), 87.

[^45]: Browning, *Equality and the Family*, 308.

[^46]: Browning, *Equality and the Family*, 295.

[^47]: Browning, *Equality and the Family*, 323.
