Puritan Reformed Theological Seminary

**Persecution and PTSD: How the Experiences of the Early Church can
Influence Sufferers of Wartime Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder**

Joshua Lamb

311: Ancient Church History

November 10, 2014

Thesis
======

The Christian church was born under persecution and trauma. The false
arrest, illegal trial, and murder of Jesus Christ marked the first
traumatic death of the Christian church. Since then, believers have
suffered under wars, famine, persecution, martyrdom, and many other
severe events. This paper seeks to examine the counseling methods of the
early church fathers to a church experiencing trauma and how their
exhortations can be used by those who suffer from wartime post-traumatic
stress disorder. It will also be shown how the counseling of the early
church fathers is more applicable to the problem of PTSD than methods
employed by secular psychology.

Persecution in the Early Church
===============================

The church has experienced persecution in various forms from the time of
the Apostles to the present day. Early Roman emperors were at times
particularly oppressive of Christians due to their break from religious
and social norms of the day such as emperor-worship. In Roman culture it
was difficult to be a confessing Christian and remain conspicuous.
Paganism so pervaded the culture that to use the public baths, enlist in
the military, or conduct transactions at the market often required
idolatrous activities that would be against the conscience of a
believer. This inherently caused Christians to be ostracized and
marginalized even under normal circumstances.

However, circumstances could shift from normal to extreme very rapidly
depending upon the temperament of local or national government
officials. Under Emperor Nero, Christians were burnt alive and used for
illumination in the palace courtyard and elsewhere[^1]. These spectacles
caused Christians to be referred to as *semaxii*, in reference to the
boards that believers were often lashed to while undergoing this
torture[^2]. The chastity of women was also violated on several
occasions[^3][^4]. Many other incidents of persecution occurred
throughout the early church, such as the seizure and arson of personal
property[^5]. The level of violence experienced by Christians could also
be inflamed by personal feuds or disputes with non-believers. It was
easy to leverage the faith of a believer against them by dragging them
before a proconsul under the charge of refusing to worship the emperor.
A faithful believer would confess Christ, forcing the official into a
position to punish them. How then did Christians live faithfully amidst
such a reality?

Christian Behavior under Persecution
====================================

The harsh reality of persecution caused many faithful believers to
become martyrs. Their behavior is crucial to understanding their
perspective of history and personal identity. Several accounts of early
church history reveal that Christians who were martyred shared at least
several characteristics: they refused to renounce Christ under threat of
death, they gave evangelistic testimony before their accusers of the
work of Christ, they sang hymns, and they offered themselves up to God
in prayer[^6].

Two examples of faithful martyrs are Polycarp (the bishop of Smyrna) and
Vibia Perpetua, an *honestiores* (from the noble class). Perpetua was
arrested along with several other believers and put into prison where
they shared in the agape feast (a time of fellowship) the night before
being thrown into the arena to be executed for their belief in
Christ[^7]. The next morning as they entered the arena, their conduct
was recorded to be upright and peaceful, even while being gored by
bulls[^8]. The account of Perpetua reveals how Christians turned to the
Lord and the fellowship of the saints even in the midst of certain
death, and were able to have strong faith in Jesus in the worst of
circumstances.

The account of the *Martyrdom of Polycarp* records in detail how the
86-year old bishop of Smyrna faithfully walked through martyrdom, which
served as an example to many Christians until circa A.D. 311 when much
persecution was relaxed by edicts issued by Emperor Constantine[^9]. The
account is valuable because it records how Polycarp held fast his
confession, offered to explain Christ to the proconsul, and offered up
prayer to God before and during martyrdom.

There are also records of Christians serving in the Roman military under
Emperor Diocletian and edicts that those who would not offer pagan
sacrifices should be scourged[^10]. Christians in this situation faced
both the horrors of war that modern veterans face, as well as the
condemnation from many church fathers who strongly exhorted
pacifism[^11]. Despite these pressures, history records how the prayers
of Christian soldiers aided Rome in a battle against the Germans near
the Danube river circa A.D. 173, further emphasizing the existence of
faithful Christians among the ranks of Roman soldiers[^12].

These accounts demonstrate that even under the worst of circumstances,
Christians understood and communicated who they were, who Jesus was, and
where they were going. These three concepts were reinforced by the early
church fathers and have crucial application to today’s church and
members who are suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

Church Fathers Counsel to the Persecuted Church
===============================================

While the *Martyrdom of Polycarp* serves as an example of faithful
witness, the *Letter of Polycarp to the Philippians* serves as a model
of exhortation to the church. Several concepts in this letter provide
insight into how Christians are to live out faith when surrounded by
chaos and trauma. Polycarp encourages believers to hold steadfastly to
Jesus as our hope and guarantee of righteousness, obey God’s precepts,
be assured that faith is not in vain, and pray even for those who
persecute them[^13].

The first exhortation to hold steadfastly to Jesus should be the primary
mission of all believers at all times, especially facing persecution or
trauma. The account of the martyrs as well as the accounts of Christians
throughout the ages prove well the presence of Christ to strengthen in
the midst of trial. Polycarp knows well that Jesus and His righteousness
alone can keep us faithful in the worst of circumstances.

Secondly, he exhorts believers to obey the teachings that have been
handed down to them, understanding the Christian prerogative to pursue
holiness is not abandoned simply when hard times are present, but that
God is honored when we by faith pursue righteousness even when it leads
to persecution.

Thirdly, he reminds Christians of past accounts of God’s faithfulness,
which echo throughout the ages. The modern church has even more examples
of God’s faithfulness than Polycarp had available, proving that God is
the same yesterday, today, and forever. Faith is strengthened for the
future when we remember God’s faithfulness in the past.

Lastly, Polycarp both exhorts believers to pray, and offers intercession
for the church at Philippi. Although believers cannot control their
circumstances in the midst of trial, they have access to the God who
can. With a truly eternal perspective, Polycarp follows after Jesus in
commanding believers to pray even for their persecutors. He then prays
for the church, modeling intercessory prayer for leaders and counselors
after him.

Polycarp was both a counselor and a martyr, understanding with his
fellow persecuted believers who he was, who Jesus was, and where he was
going.

Introduction to Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
==============================================

Reports of combat-related Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and
suicide among veterans in the United States continue to rise every year,
despite increased attention to the issue in the fields of psychology and
biomedicine.

The problem is clear. Veteran suicide accounts for approximately 20% of
all suicides in the United States[^14]. What many Soldiers are not aware
of heading off to war is that the psychological effects will endure long
after their time of service is complete[^15]. Many veterans suffer
severe psychological debilitation and failure to readjust to normal
civilian life upon returning from combat. These problems then fuel
secondary social issues such as prolonged joblessness, failure to
sustain relationships, sexual promiscuity, and substance abuse. Due to
attempts by veterans to self-medicate with drugs and alcohol, deep
psychological issues can be covered over for an extended period of time
before they fully manifest[^16].

In 1973, Psychiatrist Robert Jay Lifton examined the impact of the
Vietnam War on returning veterans. Lifton’s work helped to establish
understanding of what is today known as “moral injury”, the act of a
soldier breaching cultural and religious mores regarding the taking of
human life in the midst of combat[^17]. It is in this morally grey area
that soldiers find themselves in when returning home. The Vietnam era
was particularly devastating due to the venomous reaction of the public
to soldiers as they returned home, often just days after leaving the
battlefield[^18]. Facing hostility abroad and hostility at home, many
fell quickly into substance abuse.

The medical and psychiatric communities have attempted to address the
symptoms of PTSD through a combination of antidepressants and
psychiatric care, often stemming from a naturalistic worldview. This
therapy often draws on themes of self-forgiveness and the renunciation
of self-blame[^19]. While seemingly appropriate, these solutions are not
applicable to the problem of PTSD, which is a moral and existential
crises versus a psychiatric condition. Psychologist Edward Tick stated
that “psychologists are trained not to talk much about spirituality or
morality in the first place. But these are precisely the dimensions we
must address in order to evolve strategies that facilitate identity
reconstruction and soul restoration.[^20]” Studies indeed confirm that
veterans of Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom are
seeking out clergy more frequently than
psychiatrists/psychologists[^21].

If both the reporting of PTSD and desire to seek out clergy continues,
religious institutions have an opportunity to assist sufferers in a way
that is outside the scope of other organizations[^22]. Christian
churches and para-church organizations steward the Gospel message,
record the redemptive acts of God in history, and possess a community of
the faithful. It is these offerings from churches that many veterans are
in desperate need of. Many passages in scripture relate directly to the
trauma associated with war. Additionally, key figures such as the
Apostle Paul, King David, Jesus Christ, and numerous saints and martyrs
throughout history have experiences that resonate well with sufferers of
PTSD[^23]. Herein lies an opportunity not only to assist veterans but
also to enhance the biblical counseling movement, which in the era of
counselors such as David Powlison, is focused on the relationship
between worship and idolatry. In the Journal of Biblical Counseling,
Winston Smith notes “The human condition isn’t just one of high-handed
sin, but also ignorance, shame, weakness, and suffering, none of which
necessarily involve idolatry or the need for rebuke. It seems to me that
advancement isn’t so much a matter of further clarifying the sinful core
of idolatry, but of exploring the variety of ways that the Bible asks us
to understand our brokenness and need for redemption.[^24]”

Further Contrast of Biblical Worldview with Secular Psychiatry
==============================================================

In juxtaposition to the biblical viewpoint, the current American
cultural understanding of PTSD and related treatment stems from a
naturalistic worldview. This understanding is not comprehensive enough
to treat severe moral, spiritual, and identity crises caused by combat
trauma. However, secular psychiatric research is helpful to identify
terms used by sufferers to describe their feelings of survivor’s guilt,
shame, remorse, helplessness, anxiety, hyper-vigilance, and spiritual
futility[^25].

Theology Professor at Notre Dame, Gerald McKenny, has argued that modern
medicine and bioethics have focused attention on the relief of suffering
to the extent that there is a failure to differentiate that suffering in
some instances can be a catalyst for change[^26]. It is the worldview of
secular psychiatry that limits its ability to treat sufferers of PTSD,
because it is inwardly focused on self and not outwardly and upwardly
focused on God.

Although the medical and psychiatric fields have taken an extreme
interest in the individual and societal consequences of war, there still
remains a difficulty engaging sufferers of PTSD on a level that is
transformational. Recovering from this type of trauma requires one to
re-evaluate their concept of self and identity, which is where the
fields of secular psychiatry and biblical counseling have a major point
of difference.

Secular psychiatry would say that identity formation in an individual is
altered from a combination of nature vs nurture. However, Lacanian
psychiatric theory would posit that identity formation takes place out
of phantasmal projection – that is we internally project who we would
desire to be and then attempt to live in the real world based on this
self-conception[^27]. PTSD treatment would then involve a reconstruction
of identity according to the themes of self-forgiveness for past actions
in wartime, and/or a dissonance of past and present identity.
Unfortunately, the Soldier is often keenly aware of past actions and
have a real sense of personal guilt. Peter Marin writes in *Psychology
Today* that

> “Such knowledge has come to many vets too. What they know is this: the
> world is real; the suffering of others is real; one’s actions can
> sometimes irrevocably determine the destiny of others; the mistakes
> one makes are often transmuted directly into others’ pain; there is
> sometimes no way to undo that pain—the dead remain dead, the maimed
> are forever maimed, and there is no way to deny one’s responsibility
> or culpability, for those mistakes are written, forever and as if in
> fire, in others’ flesh.[^28]”

It is this real and tangible awareness of moral guilt that modern
psychiatry is unable to address in order to facilitate true identity
reconstruction.

In contrast, the biblical viewpoint of personal identity stems from who
someone is in relation to the Lord Jesus Christ. Inherent in this
relationship is the presupposition that what truly matters is not a
phantasm or self-conception of identity, but the reception of identity.
We receive our identity and are told who we are and what we are from
God. Some put forward that this isn’t only a static positioning of
relationship with Christ, but is also a dynamic positioning as we follow
Christ in the context of an active relationship[^29]. This viewpoint
aids sufferers of wartime PTSD because it places their identity in the
context of a divine relationship, addresses tangible moral guilt, and
provides true identity restoration between the Soldier and God.

Application for the Contemporary Church
=======================================

The counsel of the early church fathers and the records of faithful
martyrs reveal several lessons that can be adopted by present sufferers
of wartime trauma. These lessons can be categorized into two groups:
their understanding, and what actions they took based on that
understanding.

The church fathers understood the identity of Jesus Christ, who they
were in relation to Him, and their circumstances in light of eternity.
As confessing believers in Christ, the church fathers knew Jesus’
identity as Savior which fueled their exhortations to the church to hold
fast amid persecution. They also understood that as disciples they were
complete in Christ and that their persecution and possible martyrdom
would only serve to further the perfection of their faith. Their view of
present circumstances against the backdrop of eternity granted them an
objective understanding which comforted them during trial. These
concepts are powerful to sufferers of PTSD because the identity of Jesus
is stronger than their shattered identity, because they need to
understand who they are in relation to God, and because they need to
know how to place their story in eternal context. If these ideas are
communicated by ministers or biblical counselors they would serve to
assist suffering veterans in rebuilding their identity.

Based on the understanding of these concepts, faithful martyrs took
practical steps which would also assist PTSD sufferers in their
recovery. Several accounts reveal that martyrs often used hymnology and
prayers of supplication to God during their hardest moments of trial.
The use of hymns reinforces the truths of scripture and centers the
worshiper on the truth of Jesus Christ.

In conclusion, the counsel of the early church fathers to persecuted
believers provided theological and practical concepts that can be
adopted by the modern church to greatly aid sufferers of wartime trauma
as they rebuild their identity and find their place in God’s redemptive
story.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Augustine. *The city of God*. A Doubleday image book D59. Garden City,
N.Y: Image Books, 1958.

Berg, Gary. “The relationship between spiritual distress, PTSD and
depression in Vietnam combat veterans.” *Journal of Pastoral Care &
Counseling (Online)* 65, no. 1 (January 1, 2011).
http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=rfh&AN=ATLA0001905510&site=ehost-live&scope=site
(accessed August 23, 2014).

Beuving, Mark. “The early church on killing: a comprehensive sourcebook
on war, abortion, and capital punishment.” *Trinity Journal* 34, no. 2
(September 1, 2013): 325–327.

Donovan, Jane. “Battle scars: veterans turn to clergy for counseling.”
*Christian Century* 129, no. 3 (February 8, 2012): 34–36.

Eusibius. *Ecclesiastical History 5.5*, n.d.

Gebhardt, Oscar von. *Acta Martyrum Selecta 91*. Berlin, 1902.

Green, Jocelyn. “When the War Never Ends.” *Christianity Today* 53, no.
7 (July 2009): 48–50.

Hall, Newman. *Gethsemane, or leaves of healing from the garden of
grief*. Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1891.

Hurst, Andrea. “On the Meaning of Being Real: Fantasy and ‘the Real’ in
Personal Identity-Formation.” *South African Journal of Philosophy* 31,
no. 2 (May 2012): 278–289.

J.B. Lightfoot, and J.R. Harmer. *The Apostolic Fathers: Greek texts and
English translation of their writings*. Translated by Michael W. Holmes.
2nd ed. Grand Rapids, 1992.

Jacob, Mel. “Post-traumatic stress disorder : facing futility in and
after Vietnam.” *Currents in Theology and Mission* 10, no. 5 (October 1,
1983): 291–298.

Kinghorn, Warren. “Combat trauma and moral fragmentation: a theological
account of moral injury.” *Journal of the Society of Christian Ethics*
32, no. 2 (September 1, 2012): 57–74.

Marin, Peter. “Living in Moral Pain.” *Veterans For Peace UK*, n.d.
http://veteransforpeace.org.uk/2013/living-in-moral-pain-by-peter-marin/
(accessed September 8, 2014).

Ruinart. *Acta Martyrum Sincera 125*. Amsterdam, 1713.

———. *Acta Martyrum Sincera 145*. Amsterdam, 1713.

Singer, Mel. “Shame, Guilt, Self-Hatred and Remorse in the Psychotherapy
of Vietnam Combat Veterans Who Committed Atrocities.” *American Journal
of Psychotherapy* 58, no. 4 (September 2004): 377–385.

Smith, Winston. “Book Review: The Biblical Counseling Movement after
Adams.” *Journal of Biblical Counseling* 27, no. 3 (2013): 89–93.

Stone, Patrick James. “Post-traumatic faith: understanding the plight of
Christians who have killed in combat.” *Christianity Today* 50, no. 5
(May 1, 2006): 56–56.

Tacitus. *Annals 5.5*, n.d.

———. *Annals 15.44*, n.d.

Tertullian. *Apology 50*, n.d.

———. *On Idolatry 19*, n.d.

Veilleux, Armand. “Identity with Christ: Modeling Our Lives on RB 72.”
*Cistercian Studies Quarterly* 45, no. 1 (February 2010): 13–33.

Workman, Herbert B. “Persecution in the early church: a chapter in the
history of renunciation.” 314–319. The 36th Fernley lecture. London:
Charles H. Kelly, 1906.

[^1]: . Tacitus, *Annals 15.44*, n.d.

[^2]: . Tertullian, *Apology 50*, n.d.

[^3]: . Tacitus, *Annals 5.5*, n.d.

[^4]: . Augustine, *The city of God*, A Doubleday image book D59 (Garden
    City, N.Y: Image Books, 1958), 52-61.

[^5]: . Ruinart, *Acta Martyrum Sincera 125* (Amsterdam, 1713).

[^6]: . Ruinart, *Acta Martyrum Sincera 145* (Amsterdam, 1713).

[^7]: . Herbert B. Workman, “Persecution in the early church: a chapter
    in the history of renunciation,” The 36th Fernley lecture (London:
    Charles H. Kelly, 1906), 314–319.

[^8]: . Oscar von Gebhardt, *Acta Martyrum Selecta 91* (Berlin, 1902).

[^9]: . J.B. Lightfoot and J.R. Harmer, *The Apostolic Fathers: Greek
    texts and English translation of their writings*, trans by. Michael
    W. Holmes, 2nd ed. (Grand Rapids, 1992), 222-245.

[^10]: . Mark Beuving, “The early church on killing: a comprehensive
    sourcebook on war, abortion, and capital punishment,” *Trinity
    Journal* 34, no. 2 (September 1, 2013): 325–327.

[^11]: . Tertullian, *On Idolatry 19*, n.d.

[^12]: . Eusibius, *Ecclesiastical History 5.5*, n.d.

[^13]: . J.B. Lightfoot and J.R. Harmer, *The Apostolic Fathers: Greek
    texts and English translation of their writings,* 215-221.

[^14]: . Warren Kinghorn, “Combat trauma and moral fragmentation: a
    theological account of moral injury,” *Journal of the Society of
    Christian Ethics* 32, no. 2 (September 1, 2012): 57–74.

[^15]: . Patrick James Stone, “Post-traumatic faith: understanding the
    plight of Christians who have killed in combat,” *Christianity
    Today* 50, no. 5 (May 1, 2006): 56–56.

[^16]: . Mel Jacob, “Post-traumatic stress disorder : facing futility in
    and after Vietnam,” *Currents in Theology and Mission* 10, no. 5
    (October 1, 1983): 291–298.

[^17]: . Kinghorn, “Combat trauma and moral fragmentation.”

[^18]: . Jacob, “Post-traumatic stress disorder.”

[^19]: . Mel Singer, “Shame, Guilt, Self-Hatred and Remorse in the
    Psychotherapy of Vietnam Combat Veterans Who Committed Atrocities,”
    *American Journal of Psychotherapy* 58, no. 4 (September 2004):
    377–385.

[^20]: . Gary Berg, “The relationship between spiritual distress, PTSD
    and depression in Vietnam combat veterans,” *Journal of Pastoral
    Care & Counseling (Online)* 65, no. 1 (January 1, 2011),
    http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=rfh&AN=ATLA0001905510&site=ehost-live&scope=site
    (accessed August 23, 2014).

[^21]: . Jane Donovan, “Battle scars: veterans turn to clergy for
    counseling,” *Christian Century* 129, no. 3 (February 8, 2012):
    34–36.

[^22]: . Jocelyn Green, “When the War Never Ends,” *Christianity Today*
    53, no. 7 (July 2009): 48–50.

[^23]: . Newman Hall, *Gethsemane, or leaves of healing from the garden
    of grief* (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1891).

[^24]: . Winston Smith, “Book Review: The Biblical Counseling Movement
    after Adams,” *Journal of Biblical Counseling* 27, no. 3 (2013):
    89–93.

[^25]: . Jacob, “Post-traumatic stress disorder.”

[^26]: . Kinghorn, “Combat trauma and moral fragmentation.”

[^27]: . Andrea Hurst, “On the Meaning of Being Real: Fantasy and ‘the
    Real’ in Personal Identity-Formation,” *South African Journal of
    Philosophy* 31, no. 2 (May 2012): 278–289.

[^28]: . Peter Marin, “Living in Moral Pain,” *Veterans For Peace UK*,
    n.d.,
    http://veteransforpeace.org.uk/2013/living-in-moral-pain-by-peter-marin/
    (accessed September 8, 2014).

[^29]: . Armand Veilleux, “Identity with Christ: Modeling Our Lives on
    RB 72,” *Cistercian Studies Quarterly* 45, no. 1 (February 2010):
    13–33.
