Puritan Reformed Theological Seminary

**How the Puritan Views of Church Discipline Support a Practical
Theology of Forgiveness**

Joshua Lamb

324: Puritan Theology

March 16, 2015

Introduction
============

One of the fundamental distinctives of the church is that it exercises
discipline on its members. While contemporary views of church discipline
are often negative, it is really borne out of a motive of love. Church
discipline seeks both the clear distinction between the church and the
world, as well as loving chastisement and restoration when members of
the church go astray. However, Puritan theologians held different
viewpoints as to the nuances of how church discipline is to be carried
out. This paper examines these nuanced views among the Puritans,
examines the statements of censures in major reformed creeds, as well as
identifying some practical implications for the lives of individual
believers. How can the Puritan views of church discipline serve as a
model for seeking forgiveness and restoration in church member
relationships?

Puritan Viewpoints
==================

The Puritans largely agree that church discipline is an essential “mark”
of the church, alongside preaching and the administration of the
sacraments. These three marks originate in Article 29 of the Belgic
Confession of 1561, which states:

> “The true church can be recognized if it has the following marks:
> *(1)* The church engages in the pure preaching of the gospel; *(2)* it
> makes use of the pure administration of the sacraments as Christ
> instituted them; *(3)* it practices church discipline for correcting
> faults. In short, it governs itself according to the pure Word of God,
> rejecting all things contrary to it and holding Jesus Christ as the
> only Head. By these marks one can be assured of recognizing the true
> church-- and no one ought to be separated from it.[^1]”

The Puritans differed significantly as to how this was to be
administered, including who has the authority to administer church
discipline in its various stages. Additionally, there were heretics such
as Erastus that presented views far from orthodox which only served to
muddy the waters. The first question the Puritans had to contend with
was the boundary between the Church and the Magistrate.

### Church and Magistrate

Puritans including John Owen emphasized the need to obey the government
as well as the authority of the church. The Puritans also recognized
that men were bound by only two things: sins and laws[^2]. However, they
clearly identified the differences between the two bodies of authority.
The first difference is the prerogatives pertaining to each institution.
The motivation of the church is always restoration, whereas the
motivation of the magistrate is judicial punishment. Contemporary
reformed literature also recognizes that the purpose of discipline by
the civil government is to “bear the sword in punishment”, which differs
from the church’s goal of chastisement with the hope of
reconciliation[^3]. This followed along John Calvin’s view that
“discipline is a fatherly rod”[^4].

Owen also believed that not only were the motivations of the church and
magistrate different, but also their realm of control. The church could
not control the activities of those under church discipline while they
were outside the church[^5]. This means that the church could not place
restrictions on personal property or employment, areas that clearly fall
under the realm of civil government. This view was contrary to that of
men such as Thomas Erastus, who believed the church’s authority to “cut
off” meant “to kill”, even in New Testament times[^6]! Owen’s view of
church and state as being separate bodies of authority was orthodox in
the minds of most Puritans, but *who* in the church has that authority
was the subject of much division.

### The Power of the Keys

The source of authority that Puritans recognized was referred to as the
“Power of the Keys”. This is in reference to when Christ said to Peter
“And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and
whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and
whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.”
(Matthew 16:19) What was contended by Puritan pastors and theologians
was *who* in the church had this power. Was the power of the keys given
only to officers? Was the power given to the whole church? To every
individual believer? This question was cited as the primary exegetical
dispute at the Westminster Assembly and marked a key difference between
Presbyterians and Congregationalists[^7].

On one side were men such as John Cotton, Jeremiah Burroughs, and Samuel
Rutherford, who believed that Christ’s command was to Peter as a
believer and not a church officer[^8]. This meant that through extension
every believer has the power of the keys. Rutherford used the example of
1 Corinthians 5 to illustrate that when the Corinthian church as a whole
was rebuked, it meant the whole church had power in church discipline.

On the other side were men such as Thomas Hooker, George Gillespie and
Samuel Clarke, who contended that the power was given to church
officers[^9]. However, even men on both sides had a mix of
interpretations. Hooker believed that women and servants were not part
of the “binding and loosening church”, but Rutherford countered that
elsewhere in their writings Hooker and Cotton had stated that women were
granted the power of the keys[^10]. However, as the subject was debated,
other writings were published which helped to clarify the difference in
positions.

The Presbyterian work, *Jus Divinum Ministerii Evangelici* (The Divine
Right of the Gospel-Ministry) distinguished between what it called the
subject and object of the keys[^11]. A church congregation was
considered the object, while the church officers were regarded as the
subject. It was also argued that there is a sense in which the body at
large had power because it voted in the church officers. Although
Puritan theologians held differing views on the topic of keys, the
Presbyterian understanding won out in the writing of the Westminster
Confession of Faith. That is, the understanding that the power of the
keys was granted to Peter as an officer, and by extension to officers of
the church. Assuming that church officers are responsible for the
discipline of the church, there were also varying views on how church
discipline was to be conducted.

### The Excommunication Process

The Puritans also held differing views on the excommunication process.
John Owen held that based on his exegesis of Scripture there was only
one level of excommunication[^12]. In contrast, Georgie Gillespie drew
on several extra-biblical sources from Jewish history a three-level
view, based on writings from historians such as Grotius and Josephus.
Gillespie claimed that this was based on Jewish tradition as recorded in
the Talmud and other writings. The levels were נדוי (niddui), חרם
(cherem), and שׁמתא (schammata)[^13].

Drawing on earlier work from Hebrew Professor Bonaventura Cornelius
Bertramus, Gillespie understood the first level of niddui to be a
suspension from the sacrament. At this level, Gillespie understood that
the individual could still participate in teaching but was looked on as
being outside the community of faith. In Gillespie’s interpretation,
this was for more minor offenses.

The next level of cherem was someone who, in addition to not
participating in the sacraments, was not able to hear the teaching or
even to go near to the temple. He was considered even more cut off from
the community. In fact, someone under cherem was even less privileged
than a heathen publican, who was at least allowed onto the outer court.
Individuals only reached this stage if they continued in unrepentance
under niddui.

The final level of schammata was considered the final cut off between
someone and the community of faith. The person was suffered to stand in
the gate, and to be nowhere near the temple or to be in any way a part
of the community. Other interpretations state that this level of
excommunication was the giving of the person over to death. As a
community, the Jews had Shammatised the Cuthrites (Samaritans).

These three levels continued under some churches using the titles of
excommunicatio minor, major, and maxima[^14]. Excommunicatio minor,
corresponding to niddui, was the restriction of the believer from the
Lord’s Supper. Excommunicatio major, akin to cherem, was the throwing
out of the person from the church. Excommunicatio maxima, corresponding
to schammata, was the delivering of the flesh to destruction.

It needs to be restated that although Gillespie’s view has compelling
evidence of a three-level view of church discipline that ultimately this
was drawn from extra-biblical sources of tradition. Jewish and early
church practice can be helpful in some instances, but the seriousness of
church discipline makes it imperative that the rule of *sola scriptura*
is followed. This makes John Owen’s view of suspension more accurate to
Scripture. Either someone is in the community of faith or they are not.

In summary, many of the puritans agreed on the mutual exclusion of power
between the church and state in manners of discipline. The differences
emerged in relation to the power of the keys as well as how the process
of church discipline was to be conducted. It is at this point that an
examination of reformed creeds helps us to understand the development
and variance of church discipline orders.

Creeds and Confessions
======================

A chronological review of major creeds and confessions serves to
illustrate how the understanding of church discipline grew until the
discussions which took place between Puritans at the Westminster
Assembly.

### Belgic Confession

The Belgic confession of 1561 laid a groundwork for the terminology of
the “true marks” of the church, in which the “third mark” of censures
was first mentioned and defined. This description takes place in Article
29, followed by Article 30 on church government, Article 31 on church
officers, and finally Article 32 on church discipline[^15]. However,
this article does not state any process for church discipline, only that
excommunication is required to preserve unity in the body. However, the
definition of the true marks put forward a major contribution in
thinking that would be picked up and utilized by divines at Westminster.

### Heidelberg Catechism

Moving forward in time two years, the Heidelberg Catechism addresses in
Question 83 the subject of the keys, and church discipline in Question
85[^16]. At this point, the subject of the keys is treated in terms of
defining what the keys are, but not *who* in the church holds this
power. Question 85 then goes on to define the conditions for church
discipline, in that any member, or appointed person in the church that
does not behave in accordance with Christian principles is barred from
the Lord’s Table and in the same manner excluded in Christian
fellowship. Here the confession bolsters John Owen’s argument that there
is only one level to church excommunication.

### Church Order of Dordt

The Church Order of Dordt in 1619 represents a big step forward in
caveating various aspects of why, how, and when to conduct church
discipline[^17]. The order devotes the fourth and final section to the
subject of censures in articles 71-86. The Order begins by clearly
delineating the differences between the spiritual act of church
discipline and any separate acts legally taken by the government against
the individual. A clear distinction between the authorities of church
and state is evident.

The Order then begins to unfold nuances of procedure in accordance with
Matthew 18, such as ceasing discipline upon repentance between one or
two brothers. Here it is made evident that the church at large need not
be informed of petty offenses between members that could easily be
resolved in private. The distinction between private and public sins is
acknowledged, with responsibility for judging public sins given over to
the consistory. Here in the Order we see in action how Matthew 18 is
overlaid onto the Presbyterian form of government. It is easily
inferenced that the Synod of Dordt interprets Christ’s instructions in
Matthew 18 to “tell it to the church” as being a statement to report the
offense to church officers, and not simply to the entire gathered
congregation. This point was argued by Samuel Rutherford against Thomas
Hooker in his survey of Hooker’s *Summe of Church Discipline*[^18]. They
held differing views based on the opposing presuppositions about whether
a church can function without officers, Hooker arguing to the
affirmative.

The Order then in effect sets forth a bi-level view of church
censorship. In the first level, the member is barred from the Lord’s
Table and admonished by the consistory. If admonishment is to not avail
than the second level of being excommunicated is considered and applied.
The Order shows evidence of Christian love as it also instructs member
of the church to be prayed for to that they may be re-admitted. Article
77 contains instructions to finally announce to the congregation the
name of the sinner so that excommunication can take place. It is here
that the Order makes a useful interpretation of Matthew 18. Whereas
Hooker and Rutherfod debated the meaning of “telling it to the church”
in reference to the assembled body or to officers, the Order makes an
important clarification in process. The Order states that first the sins
are told in private to the consistory (officers), then after failed
admonishment to the entire congregation. This logically flows out of
Matthew 18 in answering the question “How can a member truly be
excommunicated if the congregation is not aware which member is
sinning?”. Therefore, the 1619 Order of Dordt was a significant leap
forward in terms of the practical understanding of Matthew 18.

### Westminster Confession of Faith (WCF)

These earlier creeds and orders together provided a good historical
foundation for the debates at Westminster regarding the keys, the levels
of censures, and the relationship between the church and the magistrate.
Chapter 30 of the Westminster Confession of Faith reflects the
Presbyterian understanding[^19]. The first paragraph establishes the
“visible” government as distinct from the civil magistrate, as well as
referencing that the source of this power is Christ, drawing on passages
such as Isaiah 9:6 which clearly establish the Lordship of Christ over
the church.

The second paragraph defines the keys as belonging not to all church
members, but to officers of the visible church. The paragraph also
contains similar language to Question 83 of the Heidelberg Catechism in
defining the bi-fold power of the keys: that of preaching and that of
censorship. The illustration of the open and shut door to the kingdom of
heaven is utilized for both preaching and censures.

The third paragraph expands upon the Heidelberg by explaining not just
the process of censorship but the *why* of censorship. The confession
cites the following reasons for church discipline: reclaiming lost
brothers, preventing similar offenses by others, not allowing the
“leaven to affect the lump”, vindicating the honor of Christ, and for
preventing the wrath of God[^20]. The earlier creeds lacked this
expansive reasoning and thus the Westminster Confession added a much
clarified understanding of the *why* behind Matthew 18.

The fourth paragraph sets forth a concise definition of how discipline
is to be administered, incorporating similar elements to the Church
Order of Dordt. However, the WCF does not incorporate the detailed
statements regarding “telling the offense to the whole church”.

### Summary

Taken together, it is evident that prior creeds helped to serve as a
basis for the statements that would be incorporated into the Westminster
Confession. While divines such as George Gillespie held to a three-fold
(niddui, cherem, schammata) view of the church discipline process, the
two-fold view of restriction from the Lord’s Table and excommunication
was the final statement in the confession. The differences between
Congregationalists and Presbyterians regarding the power of the keys was
also written into the confession in favor of the Presbyterians.

What emerges is the following majority understanding of Matthew 18.
Firstly, that the believer is to go to an offending brother in private
and attempt to reconcile with full privacy in the matter. He is not to
tell the consistory or any other parties, due to the motivation of love
that should pervade the entire church discipline process. If this fails,
he is then to go to the church officers, who hold the power of the keys
and bring the matter before them, fulfilling the first understanding of
“tell it to the church”. The consistory, maintaining discretion, then
approaches the offending brother to be reconciled. If he refuses, he is
then barred from the Lord’s Table while attempts continue for some time.
If the brother remains impenitent, the church officers then fulfill the
second understanding of “tell it to the church” by informing the
congregation of the general nature of the offense, establishing
excommunication, and leading the congregation in continuous prayer for
the sinning brother. If the brother arrives at genuine repentance he is
to be welcomed again with grace, fulfilling one of the goals of church
censures.

Practical Theology of Boundaries and Forgiveness
================================================

It is clear how Puritan writings and earlier church creeds led to the
fuller understanding of Matthew 18 listed above. The question now
becomes “how can this understanding be applied in the context of
personal relationships affected by church discipline?” If a believer has
reported these offenses to the church, can these concepts be further
used to form redemptive boundaries and to seek reconciliation? There are
two lay-member viewpoints that can be informed by the church censure
process, that of the *offended* brother, and that of the *offending*
brother.

### Offended brother

Taking note of the normative process listed in the last section, how
should the relationship between the offended and offending brother look
like at the various stages of the church discipline process? The first
question arises at the point of the offense. Was the offense intentional
or unintentional? How significant was the offense?

One of the reasons Matthew 18 has the offended brother go to the
offending brother is so that the weightiness of the offense can be
measured by the brother who is offended. Simply put, if it isn’t worth
taking the time to talk to your brother about it, then it can perhaps be
dismissed or forgiven[^21]. The root question that needs to be answered
is “If this goes unaddressed, will it cause me to become bitter?” If the
answer is “No”, then the offended brother can simply forgive through
prayer and move on.

However, if the offense is serious enough to confront the brother, then
this should be prayerfully and graciously sought out. It should be noted
here that Samuel Rutherford and Thomas Hooker disagreed on whether or
not a believer had a right to rebuke a member who was not of his own
congregation[^22]. Rutherford interpreted Leviticus 19:17 gave a
universal right for believers to rebuke other believers. It should be
emphasized the imperative to *tell the offending brother*. Jay Adams
notes the importance of approaching the offending brother in
humility[^23]. How many misinterpretations or miscommunications could be
cleared up by performing this step instead of resorting to gossip or
withdrawing fellowship[^24]? Former Reverend of Westminster Chapel, G.
Campbell Morgan, stresses that it is the *duty* of the offended brother
to tell the offending brother the fault between them[^25].

What if the offending brother does not respond? At this point,
boundaries in the relationship may be wise for the offended brother to
establish, especially if the incident represents a pattern that could be
repeated with harmful effects to others. It may be appropriate at this
point to reach out to two or three brothers and arrange a meeting with
all parties. This is another point at which the Puritan understanding of
the formal church censure process can be carried over into personal
relationships. The goal is the same corporately and individually –
restoration and reconciliation of the members. Additionally, the
“barring from the sacrament” principle can be carried over into a
“barring from benefits” of friendship. While maintaining a redemptive
outlook, it is appropriate to withhold favors of friendship that may
have been more common, in the hopes that the seriousness of the offense
is properly communicated.

According to Matthew 18, the additional brothers that are to be brought
in are there to witness and also to counsel. They should attempt by all
means to resolve the issue at this point between the two parties. If
however, this does not get accomplished, there is a mutual
responsibility to tell it to the church. Following on the Puritan
understanding, this means they must inform the office-bearers.

As the church discipline process continues, the offended brother should
maintain their boundaries of personal relationships, but at this point
it could be debated whether or not to treat the offended brother as a
“publican” until the process is resolved. At the point of
excommunication is when this is clearly allowed.

When the step is taken that the church is informed by the elders to
treat the offending brother as a publican is when the activities and
responsibilities of the offended brother are clarified.

Firstly, he has an ongoing responsibility of prayer. While this may seem
unfair that the one being offended must labor, it is important to
recognize that both belong to the body of Christ and it is in the best
interests of the body that the brother is regained.

Secondly, he has a responsibility admonish even when treating the other
brother as a publican. In the course of daily life, if their paths
cross, the offended brother still has the responsibility to graciously
warn him of unrepentant sin and offer hope of reconciliation.

Thirdly, he must accept a valid repentance if it does eventually come.
He cannot hold a grudge or refer back to the incident in the future as a
way to gain leverage over the offending brother. True repentance merits
true forgiveness. This process will be easier if the heart-motivation
has been a sincere reconciliation.

### Offending brother

The other viewpoint to consider is that of the brother accused of the
offense. He may be willfully rejecting of the accusation, or see the
matter in a different light. In either case, what are his
responsibilities towards his brother and the rest of the body?

Firstly, the same task of prayerful consideration is warranted for the
brother being accused of wrongdoing. Even if the accusation does not
seem to have much merit, perhaps there is still a seed of truth in it?
It is important to consider that if another brother takes the time to
point out a way in which they have been wronged, especially in a spirit
of humility, that perhaps there is substance in the accusation.
Responding harshly to criticism adds merit to the accusation even if it
is false.

Secondly, he has the responsibility to uphold the reputation of the one
accusing him and not to spread gossip and dissension. Even if the
accusation is baseless, responding with slander only heaps sin on top of
sin. This is a wrong way to handle accusation and could lead ultimately
to a church split[^26]. As gossip spreads, teams begin to form and it is
inevitable that this would cause tension and clashes within the
congregation.

Thirdly, the member needs to see the wisdom of the church discipline
process as restorative in nature, and not punitive. Being accused of a
sin by another member can easily cause a person to go into “defensive
mode” and look for ways to counterattack. However, this mindset is not
in line with the Puritan understanding of Matthew 18. Repeatedly, the
consensus of Puritan divines was that church discipline was for unity
and restoration. This understanding gives great aid to the brother in
both the categories of rightfully and wrongfully accused. Either way,
repentance leads to life. This can be a great comfort to the person
battling false accusation because the discipline process is not slanted
in favor of the accuser or the accused, but instead has a different goal
in mind, the true unity of Christ’s church.

Conclusion
==========

In conclusion, Puritan divines saw that church discipline was clearly an
essential mark of the church. While many shared the conviction that the
church’s power was separate from that of the magistrate, the viewpoints
differed on who in the church had that power. As a result of this
difference, Puritan pastors held varying positions on how the church
discipline process was to be exercised. This is where a brief study of
the development of reformed confessions in the area of church discipline
helps us. The expansion of the confessional statements over time,
eventually to the era of Westminster, reveals a full understanding of
how church discipline is to be conducted.

The Puritan viewpoints and the confessional standards also aid us in
framing a mindset for how we are to act towards other brothers, either
from the viewpoint of the offended or offending brother. The
contributions from Puritan thought in this regard are three-fold: (1)
the difference between church authority and state authority, (2) the
goal of church discipline, and (3) the responsibilities members have for
one another.

Firstly, the clear delineation between church and state helps members to
relate to one another in a way that shows the church to be a “free
institution” and keep the church discipline process in perspective. This
causes members to relate to one another with grace and not to seek
state-sponsored vengeance, which would clearly be against biblical
principles.

Secondly, the Puritans remind us of the goal of church discipline. It is
not to seek punitive damages, but to see sinners restored to fellowship
in the body and to see life grow in the place of where death once
encroached. In this way, church discipline accomplishes an effect that
civil claims between members could only dream of.

Thirdly, the Puritans emphasize the responsibilities that members have
for one another. Church membership bears with it the responsibility to
confront, exhort, pray for, encourage, and even cast out – all with the
goals of restoration and unity in the body of Christ.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
============

PRIMARY SOURCES

Ames, William. *The marrow of theology*. Milestone library. Boston:
Pilgrim Press, 1968. Considered *the* standard theological textbook for
Ivy League students during the American colonial period.

Baxter, Richard. *The reformed pastor*. Puritan paperbacks. Edinburgh ;
Carlisle, Pa: The Banner of Truth Trust, 2001. A classic vision of
pastoral ministry combined with excellent counsel.

Christian Reformed Church. *Doctrinal standards of the Christian
Reformed Church consisting of the Belgic Confession, the Heidelberg
catechism, and the Canons of Dort*. Grand Rapids: Publication Committee
of the Christian Reformed Church, 1962. A printing of classic
confessions.

Gillespie, George. *Aaron’s rod blossoming ; or, the divine ordinance of
church government vindicated*. Harrisonburg, Va: Sprinkle Publications,
1985. Gillespie's classic work on church government, based heavily on
extra-biblical tradition.

Greenham, Richard. *The workes of the reverend ... M. Richard Greenham
... collected into one volume: revised, corrected, and pvblished*. The
fift and last edition. London: Printed \[by Thomas Creede\] for VVilliam
VVelby, and are to be solde at his shop in Paules church-yard, at the
signe of the Swanne, 1612.

Hoogerland, Adriaan. *The Heidelberg Catechism*. Vol. 2. 2 vols. Grand
Rapids, MI: Netherlands Reformed Book and Publishing Committee, 2009.
Printing of the catechism with helpful discussion on each question.

Owen, John. *Gospel church government*. London: Grace Publications
Trust, 2012. Easier to read printing of Owen's *essential* work on
church discipline process and goals.

———. *The true nature of a gospel church and its government (1689)*.
London: J. Clarke, 1947. Older printing of Owen's classic work on church
discipline.

———. *The works of John Owen*. London: Banner of Truth Trust, 1965.
Contains many well-known writings by Owen, a must have.

Rutherford, Samuel. *A survey of the Survey of that summe of
church-discipline,penned by Mr. Thomas Hooker, late pastor of the church
at Hartford upon Connecticut in New England: Wherein the way of the
churches of N. England is now re-examined; arguments in favour thereof
winnowed; the principles of that way discussed; and the reasons of most
seeming strength and nerves, removed*. London: Printed by J. G. for
Andr. Crook, at the Green dragon in St. Pauls churchyard, 1658.
Rutherford's somewhat accusatory review of Thomas Hooker's work.

———. *The divine right of church-government and excommunication*.
London: John Field, n.d. Clear and thoughtful discussion on the source
and exercise of power in the church.

SECONDARY SOURCES

Adams, Jay Edward. *Handbook of church discipline*. Jay Adams library.
Grand Rapids, Mich: Ministry Resources Library, 1986. Excellent modern
guidebook for exercising church discpline.

Beeke, Joel R. *A Puritan theology: doctrine for life*. Grand Rapids,
Mich: Reformation Heritage Books, 2012. A thorough review of puritan
thinking on systematic theological concepts, combined with historical
insight.

“Church Discipline.” *Homiletics* 26, no. 5 (October 2014): 8–12. Modern
periodical which contains and exegetical discussion of Matthew 18.

Heritage Netherlands Reformed Congregation of Grand Rapids, ed. *The
Banner of sovereign grace truth: the periodical of the Heritage Reformed
Congregations*. Vol. 7. Grand Rapids, Mich: First Netherlands Reformed
Congregation, 1993. Rev. B. Elshout discusses the goal and process for
church discipline.

Jamieson, Bobby. *Guarding one another: church discipline*. 9Marks
healthy church study guides. Wheaton, Ill: Crossway, 2012. A primer and
vague overview of the church discipline process from a Baptist
perspective.

Jeschke, Marlin. *Discipling the brother: congregational discipline
according to the gospel*. Scottdale, Pa: Herald Press, 1979. A bland
discussion on the overall process for church discipline

Kersten, G. H. *Discipline in the church of Christ*. Grand Rapids, MI:
Eerdmans, 1984. Concise but very detailed pamphlet on discipline process
of the Netherlands Reformed denomination.

Lauterbach, Mark. *The transforming community: the practise of the
Gospel in church discipline*. Ross-shire, Great Britain: Christian Focus
Publications, 2003. Helpful but somewhat vague discussion of
contemporary problems with church discipline.

Macpherson, John, ed. *The Westminster Confession of Faith*. 2nd ed.
Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1958. Printing of the classic reformed
confession with helpful commentary.

Morgan, G. Campbell. *The Westminster pulpit: the preaching of G.
Campbell Morgan*. Vol. 5,7. Westwood, N.J.: F.H. Revell Co, 1954.
Pastoral encouragement on the congregational benefits of discipline.

Murray, John. *Collected writings of John Murray: professor of
systematic theology, Westminster Theological Seminary, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, 1937-1966*. Vol. 3. Edinburgh ; Carlisle, Pa: Banner of
Truth Trust, 1976. Provides good pastoral counsel.

De Ridder, Richard, Peter H. Jonker, and Leonard Verduin, eds. *The
Church orders of the sixteenth century reformed churches of the
Netherlands: together with their social,political, and ecclesiastical
context*. Grand Rapids, Mich: Calvin Theological Seminary, 1987.
Contains good background information on the cultural climate surrounding
16^th^ century church orders in the Netherlands.

Yuille, Stephen. “John Owen and the third mark of the church.” *Puritan
Reformed Journal* 2, no. 1 (January 2010): 215–217. Helpful review of
Owen's classic work of church government, with minimal reference to
other puritan viewpoints.

[^1]: Christian Reformed Church, *Doctrinal standards of the Christian
    Reformed Church consisting of the Belgic Confession, the Heidelberg
    catechism, and the Canons of Dort* (Grand Rapids: Publication
    Committee of the Christian Reformed Church, 1962), 15.

[^2]: George Gillespie, *Aaron’s rod blossoming ; or, the divine
    ordinance of church government vindicated* (Harrisonburg, Va:
    Sprinkle Publications, 1985), 193. Gillespie also argues on page 136
    that every government, including church government, has three
    elements: laws, officers, and censures.

[^3]: G. H. Kersten, *Discipline in the church of Christ* (Grand Rapids,
    MI: Eerdmans, 1984).

[^4]: Kersten, *Discipline in the church of Christ*, 3. Kersten states a
    problem exists in some reformed churches where judicial punishment
    is exercised by the church, instead of spiritual discipline.

[^5]: John Owen, *Gospel church government* (London: Grace Publications
    Trust, 2012), 80. Owen puts forward a common puritan view that
    disciplinary influence of the church doesn’t extend into other
    spheres of life. The church should be viewed in many ways as a
    voluntary association.

[^6]: Samuel Rutherford, *The divine right of church-government and
    excommunication* (London: John Field, n.d.), 351. Rutherford opposes
    Erastus’ view and would agree with Owen here on the limits of church
    power.

[^7]: Joel R. Beeke, *A Puritan theology: doctrine for life* (Grand
    Rapids, Mich: Reformation Heritage Books, 2012), 622-623.

[^8]: Samuel Rutherford, *A survey of the Survey of that summe of
    church-discipline,penned by Mr. Thomas Hooker, late pastor of the
    church at Hartford upon Connecticut in New England: Wherein the way
    of the churches of N. England is now re-examined; arguments in
    favour thereof winnowed; the principles of that way discussed; and
    the reasons of most seeming strength and nerves, removed* (London:
    Printed by J. G. for Andr. Crook, at the Green dragon in St. Pauls
    churchyard, 1658), 258.

[^9]: Gillespie, *Aaron’s rod blossoming ; or, the divine ordinance of
    church government vindicated*, 193.

[^10]: Rutherford, *A survey of the Survey of that summe of
    church-discipline,penned by Mr. Thomas Hooker, late pastor of the
    church at Hartford upon Connecticut in New England*, 255.

[^11]: Beeke, *A Puritan theology*, 624. Beeke helpfully reviews the
    effect of *Jus Divinum* on puritan thinking at the time of the
    Westminster Assembly.

[^12]: Owen, *Gospel church government*, 84. Owen seems to be directly
    aware of Gillespie’s 3-level view of church discipline cleaned from
    Talmudic tradition. Own disagrees, likely on the basis of the *sola
    Scriptura* principle.

[^13]: Gillespie, *Aaron’s rod blossoming ; or, the divine ordinance of
    church government vindicated*, vi, 21-26. Gillespie leans heavily on
    Talmudic tradition and earlier interpretation by Hebrew scholar
    Cornelius Bertramus Bonaventura.

[^14]: Gillespie, *Aaron’s rod blossoming ; or, the divine ordinance of
    church government vindicated*, 23.

[^15]: Christian Reformed Church, *Doctrinal standards of the Christian
    Reformed Church consisting of the Belgic Confession, the Heidelberg
    catechism, and the Canons of Dort*, 15-16.

[^16]: Adriaan Hoogerland, *The Heidelberg Catechism*, vol. 2, 2 vols.
    (Grand Rapids, MI: Netherlands Reformed Book and Publishing
    Committee, 2009), 82.

[^17]: Richard De Ridder, Peter H. Jonker, and Leonard Verduin, eds.,
    *The Church orders of the sixteenth century reformed churches of the
    Netherlands: together with their social,political, and
    ecclesiastical context* (Grand Rapids, Mich: Calvin Theological
    Seminary, 1987), 555-557.

[^18]: Rutherford, *A survey of the Survey of that summe of
    church-discipline,penned by Mr. Thomas Hooker, late pastor of the
    church at Hartford upon Connecticut in New England*, 258. Hooker
    believed complaints can be made to many people at once, citing
    grievances in parliament as an example. Rutherford countered with
    the example of the 10,000+ member Jerusalem church and the
    impossibility of “telling it to the church” in this manner.

[^19]: John Macpherson, ed., *The Westminster Confession of Faith*, 2nd
    ed. (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1958), 158-161.

[^20]: Richard Baxter, *The reformed pastor*, Puritan paperbacks
    (Edinburgh ; Carlisle, Pa: The Banner of Truth Trust, 2001), 105.

[^21]: Jay Edward Adams, *Handbook of church discipline*, Jay Adams
    library (Grand Rapids, Mich: Ministry Resources Library, 1986), 19,
    48.

[^22]: Rutherford, *A survey of the Survey of that summe of
    church-discipline,penned by Mr. Thomas Hooker, late pastor of the
    church at Hartford upon Connecticut in New England*, 270, 280.

[^23]: Adams, *Handbook of church discipline*, 48.

[^24]: Mark Lauterbach, *The transforming community: the practise of the
    Gospel in church discipline* (Ross-shire, Great Britain: Christian
    Focus Publications, 2003), 99.

[^25]: G. Campbell Morgan, *The Westminster pulpit: the preaching of G.
    Campbell Morgan*, vol. 5,7 (Westwood, N.J.: F.H. Revell Co, 1954),
    5:226.

[^26]: Lauterbach, *The transforming community*, 219.
