Puritan Reformed Theological Seminary

**Spiritual Warfare in John, Ephesians, and Revelation**

Joshua Lamb

241: NT Biblical Theology

April 17, 2015

Introduction
============

The Christian life can at so many times feel like a battle. Progress
feels slow and hard, only to be lost in moments of pride, anger, lust,
or fear. The reason the Christian life feels like a battle, is because
it *is* a battle. Throughout the New Testament, the life of a believer
is described in terms of warfare. With this understanding, we begin to
ask the right questions. What is the mission? What are my resources? Who
are the allies and who are the enemies? What are the conditions for
victory? These are questions with definite answers. This paper examines
the descriptions of spiritual warfare found in the Gospel of John,
Paul’s letter to the Ephesians, and the Revelation of John in order to
provide an orientation to this often under-utilized doctrine.

Gospel of John
==============

In a list of classic passages on spiritual warfare, the Gospel of John
is unlikely to be listed. From the perspective of modern culture, the
reason is understandable: there are no “offensive” miracles such as
demon exorcisms in the entire book. Herein is the first misunderstanding
that must be corrected. It is easy to think of spiritual warfare as a
showy or miraculous display of visible divine power to repel dark
forces. While this does occur several times in the New Testament, it is
a narrow-sighted understanding of all that is contained in spiritual
warfare. It would be similar to stating that an Army is only the
individual fights involved, without mentioning the doctrine, training,
mission, supplies, or intelligence. Understanding that spiritual warfare
involves much more than exorcisms allows us to approach the Gospel of
John with more eagerness. Using the lens of spiritual warfare, it is
clear that the book offers more in this area than would appear at first
glance. The book discusses three main themes related to spiritual
warfare, *authority, abiding* and *healing*.

The first major theme of authority is evident throughout the book. The
“I AM” statements of Jesus are a major thread woven through chapter
after chapter. Jesus identifies Himself as the True Light, Living Water,
The Good Shepherd, The Way, The Truth, The Life, and many other titles.
It can be inferred that if Jesus is one way, one leader, one kingdom –
that there must be another also. The Gospel makes this inference
explicit in both chapter 8 and chapter 15. Jesus states “… If ye
continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed;” (John 8:31)
before moving on to show in later verses that those who reject Him are
those that belong to the devil. There is a clear division that is stated
here. There are two kingdoms, and two heads of these kingdoms. You
either belong to the Father or you belong to the devil. The Gospel of
John answers a most fundamental question relating to spiritual warfare,
“What are the sides?”.

The second major theme is that of abiding. While it is important to know
the sides of the battle, it is also important to know how to stay on
that side. History is scattered with examples of traitors, deserters,
spies, and mercenaries. There are also the forgotten, the
missing-in-action, and the prisoners of war. How can a soldier in the
spiritual battle be kept from many deadly fates? John’s book records the
High Priestly Prayer of Jesus. Because of this prayer it is evident that
the child of God is kept, has been given the Word, will continue to be
kept, will be commissioned, and is joined in fellowship with God. The
believer is bound up with God in Christ and so abides with Him in an
unbreakable bond. This abiding identity securely anchors the spiritual
warrior to the kingdom of heaven, removing the possibility of the ugly
examples listed above. What prevents someone from becoming a Judas and
fighting for the wrong side? Abiding in Christ. What prevents someone
from getting lost and left behind on the battle field? Abiding in
Christ. What stops someone from turning into a mercenary and fighting
for their own interests above those of the kingdom of heaven? Abiding in
Christ.

The third major theme is that of healing. In many ways, healing
accomplishes things similar to exorcism. Whereas exorcism removes the
influences of the curse in evil spirits, healing removes the effects of
sin’s curse upon mankind. Healing shows forth the power of God to bring
about restoration. John records healings of the sick, invalid, lame, and
dead. It is here in the Gospel that we see most clearly the qualitative
difference between exorcism and healings. Exorcisms show God’s power,
and healings show God’s heart. We see through healings not only that
Jesus has power over the kingdom of darkness, but that His kingdom truly
is the kingdom of light. In this way, the book addresses a core issue of
spiritual warfare, *morale*. To see clearly the nobility, justice,
goodness, and mercy of heaven’s kingdom is to be invigorated to press on
in the spiritual battle. To know that the King is honorable and the
cause is merciful causes renewed vigor in the midst of the darkness of
the front lines.

In conclusion, while the Gospel of John is not the foremost text of
Scripture on spiritual warfare, it establishes a base of understanding.
It clearly delineates the battle lines, establishes the authority of
Christ, teaches how to abide in Christ, and shows His power and
prerogative to heal. John presents a compelling description of the King
and the kingdom that we are fighting for.

Ephesians
=========

The classic text of spiritual warfare is undoubtedly Paul’s letter to
the Ephesians. It is commonly known that chapter six of the letter
describes the “Armor of God”. What is easily skipped over is that the
letter as a whole functions in many ways as a battle plan. The US
military has a framework for battle plans that it refers to as the
Operational Order (OPORD). This document breaks down all aspects of
military operation including a thorough description of the mission, the
authority, and the specific objectives. The document then further takes
input from members of each “staff section” including personnel,
intelligence, operations, supply, and communications. This one document
contains every piece of information necessary for understanding the
specifics of any particular mission. It is the basis for what will be
utilized in all training and drills leading up to a trial run of the
mission before it is performed in real life. Paul’s letter to the
Ephesians contains many of the same components. Paul particularly
emphasizes the mission, the battlefield preparation, and the fight.

### The Mission

The opening section of Paul’s letter serves as an orientation to the
battle and covers several elements that are contained in a warfare
battle plan. Paul’s opening chapters contain the mission statement, the
authority, a definition of forces, and an objective statement.

Firstly, the mission statement contained in the opening chapter is “That
in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in
one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on
earth; even in him:” (Ephesians 1:10). The clear call that God has
purposed to unite all things in Christ under a universal kingship is
recorded. Additionally, the Holy Spirit is given as a seal and a
promise. Those who engage in earthly battle may be aware their side has
a clear advantage in the fight, but victory is rarely a complete
certainty. However, in spiritual battle there *is* a certain victory,
and it is assured by the promise and the seal of the Holy Spirit. This
means those who fight spiritual battles can have more morale, for the
hope of victory is more certain for them than it is for the earthly
warrior.

Secondly, the authority of Christ is set forth in the final four verses
of the opening chapter. Christ occupies a place “Far above all
principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is
named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come:”
(Ephesians 1:21). The commander-in-chief and the captain of our
salvation is clearly seen as the one who bears all authority to command
the armies of the kingdom of heaven.

Thirdly, we see a definition of forces. Any battle plan will outline the
forces that are ordered to participate in the conflict. Paul sets forth
a sketch of who the kingdom of heaven consists of. He states that we are
no longer strangers and aliens, but fellow citizens (Ephesians 2:19).
Why does citizenship matter? Because it is the citizenship of a soldier
that drives his fighting. Whether or not a soldier is drafted or a
volunteer, his day-by-day compulsion to serve is based on his
citizenship to his country. It is for his country and the people in it
that he fights. It is from there he left, and to there he longs again to
return.

Lastly, the opening chapters contain a statement of the objective. There
is a difference in Ephesians between the mission statement “to unite all
things in Christ” and the objective statement. The objective statement
answers the question “what are we seeking in the accomplishment of the
mission?”. Another way to distinguish between the two is that the
mission statement states the end goal, but the objective statement is
the reason behind the goal. So what is the objective statement of
Ephesians? Paul states that the objective is peace. It is the common
objective behind all noble wars, that aggression would cease and the
land have peace once more. It seems paradoxical, and is yet true, that a
fighter is attempting to work himself out of his profession. He fights,
with the objective that fighting would cease. However, Paul makes a
statement that is more expansive than a military battle plan ever could.
He says not only that Christ is the bringer of peace, but that Christ
*is* our peace (Ephesians 2:14). This gives the spiritual warrior a huge
advantage over the earthly warrior. The spiritual soldier realizes and
experiences the objective of war in the present conflict. The earthly
warrior can only taste peace once the hard task of fighting has been
accomplished, and only if victory has been secured. The spiritual
warrior has the assurance of victory in the present, and also the peace
of that victory. This peace is not simply because the battle has been
won, but that the commander who won the battle is in His person the
source of peace. Jesus is the well of peace who offers Himself to the
continual refreshment and encouragement of the war-weary and tired
soldier. He provides in substance what an earthly commander could not
even dare promise on paper. The experience of Christ as our peace
provides both the objective and the spiritual encouragement to fight
until the mission of putting all things in subjection under His feet is
realized.

### The Battlefield Preparation

The middle section of Ephesians breaks down all of the components of
battlefield preparation. Who are the allies? Who trains the soldiers to
fight? What armor is available? All of these questions are
systematically addressed in Paul’s letter upon close inspection.

Initially, we see the distinguishing between the allies and the enemy.
Paul states that both Jews and Gentiles are on the same side and belong
to the same kingdom (Ephesians 3:6). A classification of people into the
kingdom of God might presuppose that the enemy would also be a certain
people group or nation. However, this is not the case. The enemies of
our warfare are not flesh and blood, but powers and principalities.

Furthermore, we see that our trainers are the prophets, evangelists,
shepherds, and teachers. In the military this group would be referred to
as “cadre”. The cadre are people who have gone before and have the
experience and expertise to pass on to young and inexperienced soldiers.
This is typically denoted by a special modification to the uniform such
as unique headgear. An example of this would be airborne school, in
which the cadre wear a black baseball cap and are referred to
accordingly as “black hats”. There is a ready parallel between cadre and
prophets, both possessing a special teaching role and unique authority
to steward and herald teaching to the next generation.

Lastly, we see the crowning step in battlefield preparation – the armor.
Just as an earthly warrior dons the armor and weapons of war, so must
the spiritual warrior[^1]. The description of the armor appropriately
begins with the belt of truth. Two characteristics are unique to the
belt of truth: it is always worn, and it binds everything else. The
lesson here is that we must always have a firm apprehension and grasp of
the truth of God as it is in many ways the foundational piece of armor
on which all else attaches. Anyone whose belt has come loose knows well
the experience of being “out of the fight” and unable to perform
anything else until it is fixed. So it is spiritually, that a loosening
on the hold of truth ceases spiritual progress.

The second piece listed is the breastplate of righteousness. Gurnall
notes in his classic work that the key of the breastplate is that it
protects vital organs, such as the heart. He states further that this
piece should be considered the righteousness of Christ which is imputed
to the believer through Christ’s sacrifice[^2]. This means that the
believer is protected and assured that no weapon of the enemy can cause
him fatal harm. He may be wounded many times in the battle, but the
breastplate protects him from complete destruction, because of God’s
righteousness given to him.

The third piece of armor consists of the shoes of gospel readiness. The
Scriptures refer elsewhere to feet in relation to the gospel. Isaiah
declares “How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that
bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings
of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God
reigneth!” (Isaiah 52:7). This concept is also reinforced in the New
Testament by Paul in Romans 10:15, where the same forward-leaning and
eager spirit permeates the passage. Whereas the other pieces of armor
are listed from a “static” posture, the footwear is listed in an
“active” manner. This connotes the anticipation we should have to run
and bring the good news. The illustration of a regiment of soldiers
running onto the battlefield demonstrates the meaning of this piece of
armor. The footwear carries the soldier into battle, and likewise it is
the cause of the gospel that brings us into spiritual battle. This
readiness with which we fight communicates something of the kingdom of
heaven. We don’t trudge and drag feet into battle, we are ready and
eager. Only soldiers with high morale who are invigorated and refreshed
move forward with readiness into the fight, and so it should be with
soldiers whose feet are covered by the readiness of the gospel of peace.

The fourth piece of armor is the shield of faith. Paralleling the
shields of Roman soldiers, faith protects the whole Christian from
frontal assault. Crouching behind the shield would provide full coverage
for a Roman soldier, and stacking shields together would yield a
cumulative effect to protect from arrows. Ephesians states that the
shield can extinguish the flaming darts of the evil one. Charles Simeon
notes how the description of the flaming dart symbolizes how the lies of
the enemy cause a fire of destruction in the soul[^3]. Where a physical
shield might burn, the shield of faith remains strong. Two things become
evident here: the arrows do come, and mutual faith truly strengthens.
While the passage lists that faith can extinguish the fiery darts (lies
and attacks) of the evil one, it nowhere mentions that the attacks don’t
come. This is crucial to understand not only for this piece of armor,
but also for the whole set. Wearing the armor does not prevent attacks
from coming. The arrows of the devils lies and accusations will come
against the child of God, the question is will the Christian wear the
armor or not. Finally, we learn that mutual faith is strengthening. The
stacking of shields serves to greatly strengthen the body of Christ from
the attacks of the enemy. It is the bond of mutual faith between
brothers and sisters that can serve to protect from volleys of the
enemy’s fiery darts.

The fifth piece listed is the helmet of salvation. Just as the
breastplate of Christ’s righteousness protects the heart, so the
salvation of God protects the brain. Both vital parts are secured by
Christ’s work and merit alone. When the devil attempts to confuse the
mind of the believer that he does not truly belong to Christ because of
his unworthiness, the helmet of salvation protects his mind. The
protection of salvation gives the believer confidence to hold his head
high in the midst of battle and shun discouragement.

The sixth and final piece of armor is the sword of the Spirit. Gurnall
notes that the sword represents both the Son as the incarnate Word, and
the declarative Word. Additionally, it is the only piece of the armor
designed strictly for offensive use. The Scriptures elsewhere describe
the Word in both of these senses of meaning. The declarative Word as a
sword is enlarged in Hebrews “For the word of God is quick, and
powerful, and sharper than any twoedged sword, piercing even to the
dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and
is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.” (Hebrews
4:12). The second sense of meaning is listed in the book of Revelation
where it describes Christ as having a sword to strike down the nations,
and a piercing gaze.

All of the armor pieces together are provided by God, but need to be
worn and used by the believer. The armory of heaven is provided to the
believer for this spiritual war. Knowing the mission and the preparing
for the battlefield leaves only one thing remaining – the fight!

### The Fight

Soldiers in the fight need supplies and weapons, but they also need to
be urged and exhorted. The closing chapters of Ephesians contain
directives, urgings, and exhortations to prayer.

The directives listed by Paul are to redeem the time and to not
associate with the enemy. It is well known that soldiers often have long
stretches of free time in between missions. Many fill it up with
watching movies, reading, playing music, or games. This is true of the
spiritual warrior as well. While there is a sense in which attacks can
take place at any moment, there is also an overall tenor of waiting on
the Lord. How must this time be used? Paul answers that the time must be
redeemed and taken up with psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs (Ephesians
5:16-19). He also warns against associating with the enemy. The worst
thing that a soldier could be is a traitor and a double-agent. His
admonishment is clear not to associate with the kingdom of darkness when
we belong to the kingdom of light.

The closing chapters also make two exhortations that are particularly
invigorating for soldiers in the spiritual battle. The first is to walk
in a manner worthy of our calling, the second is to “Stand!” We are
reminded that our conduct in all matters reflects what the kingdom of
God is like, and that our failings put a stain on the reputation of the
Gospel and of Christ. We must then walk in a way that shows forth the
purity and excellence of the kingdom. In the military this is referred
to as “military bearing”, an attitude and a demeanor of excellence. We
are also exhorted to stand. This is the opening exhortation before the
listing of the armor of God. It is the instruction for what we must do
with the armor on – stand. It is both an instruction and a battle cry.

In the final verses, Paul then admonishes believers to prayer. The
statement is emphatic – “Praying always with all prayer and supplication
in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and
supplication for all saints;” (Ephesians 6:18). From the perspective of
spiritual warfare, prayer functions as a communications link to God. A
soldier without a means of communication to his higher command is almost
useless on the battlefield. The result of no contact is chaos. Prayer is
an essential element in conducting spiritual warfare and not allowing
the enemy to gain a foothold.

In summary, the letter to the Ephesians sets forth a complete
description of the mission, the steps to battlefield preparation, and
key exhortations for the fight. We know that the mission is to unite all
things in Christ. We have been given cadre, training, and armor.
Therefore, it is imperative that we make use of the training, don the
armor, stand, and pray.

Revelation
==========

In the last book of the Bible we see the finality of spiritual warfare.
Revelation gives us a clear vision of the war that is taking place, as
well as how it will spectacularly end. It is this vision which serves to
give the spiritual warrior strength to fight to the end, knowing that
victory is assured. Revelation sets forth God’s decrees, describes the
war, and reveals the heavenly city.

### God’s decrees

Throughout the book, we see the centrality of God’s immovable decree in
the future events of the world. Jesus is the one who has been given
authority over all things, an authority which He exercises against God’s
enemies without hesitation. Jesus is clearly shown to be the Alpha and
the Omega (Revelation 1:8, 5:9, 22:13)[^4]. There is not even a hint in
Revelation that the future plan of God is at risk or somehow outside of
His control[^5]. Not only do these events come to pass, but God is
repeatedly praised for His true judgment in the events of the world
(Revelation 17:14).

### The War

The main conflict in Revelation is between God and His enemies. There is
a league between Satan and Babylon, the beast and the prostitute. We see
that the enemy is the one who has declared and initiated war against
God. Stunningly, God *allows* the beast to make war on the saints and to
kill them (Revelation 13:7)[^6]. The history of the world is in God’s
grasp, and he allows the enemy to “succeed” for awhile according to His
good purposes. This provides much encouragement to saints in our own
day, who in places like Nigeria experience this warfare almost daily.
The saints are not perishing because God is weak, but rather because He
is strong and wise to bring events perfectly in line with His will.

One of the biggest surprises in Revelation is the great treason
committed by the beast (17:16-17). The league of darkness is broken up
when the beast attacks Babylon. Satan’s true colors are revealed.
Throughout human history, Satan presented himself as an ally to the
powers of the world and against God. However, in the act of destroying
Babylon he reveals his hatred and desire to destroy man as well. Satan
is on his own side, hating God and seeking mankind’s annihilation. Jesus
defeats both Satan and Babylon thoroughly and finally. He rides forth,
leading the armies of heaven, to destroy the kingdom of darkness.

### Returning home

As the kingdom of darkness turns on itself and crumbles, we see the
kingdom of light rise in the foreground. As Babylon collapses into dust,
the New Jerusalem descends out of heaven. The vision of the holy city is
painted in Revelation 21-22. There will be no wickedness in this city,
no diseases, no crying, no hunger, no thirst, no lack, no darkness. This
city will be bright and bountiful, not because the sun will shine and
cause fertility but because God Himself will be the light. The saints
will have their most desired moment. They will look upon the face of God
– forever!

Revelation then closes with three important elements which pertain to
spiritual warfare: the revealing, the announcement, and the invitation.
Jesus reveals that He has sent His angels for the purpose of showing the
saints what the future holds. This vision gives them strength and
encouragement to press on in the midst of the war, knowing that each
step they take in the battle brings them closer to the great city of
God. They can press on and remove hindrances in their way to this great
city which they are destined to reside in.

The announcement is proclaimed once more that Jesus is coming soon. This
is not only a future, it is an *imminent* future (Revelation 22:7,
22:12, 22:20). He has ascended to prepare the place where He will reside
with His saints. Surely He will return, the history of the world is all
propelling faster and faster towards this spectacular moment.

Finally, the invitation goes forth. Who will come to this great city?
It’s gates are open for the one that seeks after Christ. Babylon’s
readers have a chance to move before this takes place. Will they forsake
all their wickedness and desire righteousness? It is both an invitation
to those who desire to come, and a warning to those that do not[^7].
Will they spurn this call? The invitation is clear and sincere, “And the
Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth say, Come. And
let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the water
of life freely.” (Revelation 22:17).

In summary, the book of Revelation shows that end result of spiritual
warfare – Christ’s return, Christ’s victory over the kingdom of
darkness, and Christ’s eternal union with His people in the New
Jerusalem. This is the future and the vision of home. This is the
country and the King that believers fight for on the battlefield[^8].

Conclusion
==========

The combination of all three books produce a thorough understanding of
spiritual warfare. In John, we see Christ as the great I AM who has all
authority. We see the need to abide in Him and to take His yoke upon us.
In Ephesians, we are given the battle plan. The mission, the steps of
preparation, and the equipment are imparted to the warrior of Christ. We
hear the exhortation to “Stand!” echo in our ears. In Revelation, we see
the vision of the war and its glorious end. We see our King and our
beloved homeland. Put together, we have everything we need to encourage
us to stand firm in the faith, resist the wiles of the devil, stay
connected to Christ, and look forward with eager anticipation to His
imminent return!

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Bradley, Charles. *Sermons on some of the trials, duties, and
encouragements,of the Christian life*. London: Hamilton, Adams, and Co.
and T. Hatchard, 1853.

Edwards, Jonathan, Sereno Edwards Dwight, and Edward Hickman. *The works
of Jonathan Edwards*. Edinburgh ; Carlisle, Pa: Banner of Truth Trust,
1974.

Gurnall, William. *The Christian in complete armour: a treatise of the
saints’ war against the devil: wherein a discovery is madeof that grand
enemy of God and his people, in his policies,power, seat of his empire,
wickedness, and chief design hehath against the saints: a magazine
opened, from whence the Christian is furnished with spiritual arms for
the battle, helped on with his armour, and taught the use of his weapon:
together with the happy issue of the whole war*. Edinburgh ; Carlisle,
Pa: Banner of Truth Trust, 2002.

Large, James. *Two hundred and eighty titles and symbols of Christ*.
Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1959.

Longman, Tremper, and David E. Garland, eds. *The expositor’s Bible
commentary*. Rev. ed. Grand Rapids, Mich: Zondervan, 2005.

Metzger, Bruce M., David Allan Hubbard, and Glenn W. Barker, eds. *Word
biblical commentary*. Waco, Tex: Word Books, 1982.

Moreau, A. Scott. *Spiritual warfare: 12 studies for individuals or
groups*. Fisherman Bible Studyguide. Wheaton, Ill: Harold Shaw
Publishers, 1995.

Simeon, Charles. *The Christian, his conflicts, and his armour : an
exposition of Ephesians 6. 10-18 / Charles Simeon with a brief account
of his life and times by D. A. Thompson.* Weybridge, Surrey: Bible
Christian Unity Fellowship, 1950.

[^1]: A. Scott Moreau, *Spiritual warfare: 12 studies for individuals or
    groups*, Fisherman Bible Studyguide (Wheaton, Ill: Harold Shaw
    Publishers, 1995), 54.

[^2]: William Gurnall, *The Christian in complete armour: a treatise of
    the saints’ war against the devil: wherein a discovery is madeof
    that grand enemy of God and his people, in his policies,power, seat
    of his empire, wickedness, and chief design hehath against the
    saints: a magazine opened, from whence the Christian is furnished
    with spiritual arms for the battle, helped on with his armour, and
    taught the use of his weapon: together with the happy issue of the
    whole war* (Edinburgh ; Carlisle, Pa: Banner of Truth Trust, 2002).

[^3]: Charles Simeon, *The Christian, his conflicts, and his armour : an
    exposition of Ephesians 6. 10-18 / Charles Simeon with a brief
    account of his life and times by D. A. Thompson.* (Weybridge,
    Surrey: Bible Christian Unity Fellowship, 1950), 82.

[^4]: Tremper Longman and David E. Garland, eds., *The expositor’s Bible
    commentary*, Rev. ed. (Grand Rapids, Mich: Zondervan, 2005), 13:601.

[^5]: Charles Bradley, *Sermons on some of the trials, duties, and
    encouragements,of the Christian life* (London: Hamilton, Adams, and
    Co. and T. Hatchard, 1853), 357.

[^6]: James Large, *Two hundred and eighty titles and symbols of Christ*
    (Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1959), 263.

[^7]: Jonathan Edwards, Sereno Edwards Dwight, and Edward Hickman, *The
    works of Jonathan Edwards* (Edinburgh ; Carlisle, Pa: Banner of
    Truth Trust, 1974), 2:210.

[^8]: Bruce M. Metzger, David Allan Hubbard, and Glenn W. Barker, eds.,
    *Word biblical commentary* (Waco, Tex: Word Books, 1982), 52c:1153.
