Puritan Reformed Theological Seminary

**A Wicked King Found Wanting**

Joshua Lamb

702: Hermeneutics

November 24, 2015

Introduction
============

Daniel is a unique character in the Bible. He stood against rulers as
Moses did. He prophesied like Isaiah and Jeremiah did. He was taken
captive like Joseph. Yet Daniel was never called to be *the* mediator,
*the* prophet, or *the* savior as these men were. He was, in a way,
*normal.* Daniel was the son of upper-class parents in Jerusalem who
suddenly found himself taken captive and dragged across the known world
to the foreign city of Babylon during the first deportation of the Jews
in 605 B.C.[^1] It is hard to read his story without wondering what
Daniel’s secret was. What did he know and experience that allowed him to
face such dangers, seemingly, without flinching? This paper will examine
the ending court scene of Daniel 5:17-28 where Daniel confronts King
Belshazzar of the Babylonians. It will seek to bring out the meanings of
the overarching comparison in the text between King Nebuchadnezzar and
his grandson, King Belshazzar – with an eye to the literary and
historical context as it serves the underlying theological meanings.

### Orientation

The book of Daniel begins in 605 B.C. as Nebuchadnezzar orders the first
deportation of Jews to Babylon. Some of the ablest young men, including
Daniel, are chosen to be eunuchs to the king, employed in the service of
his harem. The book is written in both Hebrew and Aramaic, the passage
under consideration being in the middle of the Aramaic section. The book
can be thought of as addressing three main audiences: the first group of
exiles, later groups of exiles, and post-exilic Jews upon their return
to Jerusalem after the 70 years captivity[^2]. A central theme of Daniel
is the utmost reign of Jehovah over the whole earth, so the section
written in Aramaic would have been of particular interest to exiled Jews
during the time of captivity. It was the declaration that Jehovah was
sovereign, even when circumstances were not the ideal. Jews were far
from the promised land, but He was still there.

This passage in Daniel breaks into the middle of a discourse section
that begins between Daniel and King Belshazzar in the Babylonian court.
Belshazzar the “king” was regent of Babylon under Nabonidus, who had
left to oversee what is now modern day Saudi Arabia, leaving his son in
charge[^3]. Belshazzar has just hosted a party which has involved gross
immoralities and idolatrous worship (Daniel 5:2). In the middle of this
party, a hand appeared and wrote on the wall, causing Belshazzar to be
struck with fear and to call together his wise men to interpret the
meaning (Daniel 5:7). In verse 13, Daniel appears in the court and
Belshazzar speaks to him. Daniel responds in verse 17, which is the
start of our examination.

Nebuchadnezzar Raised (verses 17-19)
====================================

Upon entering the court, Daniel received an offer of gifts. He defers
the offer in order to show the impartiality of the message that he is
about to deliver[^4]. As Daniel begins his response to the king he omits
a reverent customary greeting to the king, such as “O king, live
forever!”. Although Daniel has refused gifts before, his addresses to
King Nebuchadnezzar have a clearly different tone than the one presented
here. Daniel addressed Nebuchadnezzar with greetings such as “…Peace be
multiplied unto you” (Daniel 4:1), but it appears that he does not have
this level of respect for Belshazzar. In narrative interpretation, it is
important to identify scenes, characters and plotlines[^5]. We know from
previous verses in this chapter that Daniel is painted as a protagonist
in this scene who will deliver the news to a clear antagonist, King
Belshazzar. While the king has not been responsible for acting against
Daniel personally, he has nevertheless sinned against Daniel’s God.

After the introductory preface in verse 17, Daniel launches immediately
into the prophetic message he is to bear. The form of this
interpretation can be identified as a “court contest”, which pits a
prophet of the Lord against a ruler or other adversary, as seen in books
such as Genesis and Esther[^6]. Unlike other accounts of dream or sign
interpretation, the sign itself is not revealed prior to the
explanation. Perhaps this is due to the fact that the writing on the
wall did not come by the typical medium of a private dream, but was
etched in public for all to see. This shift in typical order emphasizes
the *urgency* of the interpretation that Daniel is about to bring before
the king. The start of his prophetic discourse is introduced by the “O
thou king”. God here is referred to as the “most high” (עִלָּי) God
which will be important in the next verse, but here indicates God’s
superiority over the gods of Babylon[^7]. According to Lange’s
Commentary, the positioning of the vocative is unique because it places
Belshazzar in direct relation with the address that will soon
follow[^8]. In summary, Daniel has an *urgent* message for the king, and
the content of that message will directly relate to him.

Daniel then begins by describing the “backstory” of the message he is
bringing, which will serve as the foundation for the first narrative
cycle. Daniel describes what God has given to “thy father” king
Nebuchadnezzar (Belshazzar is biologically the grandson of
Nebuchadnezzar but in Biblical idiom it is common to still use
“father”[^9]). God had given to Nebuchadnezzar a kingdom, majesty, and
honor. He was placed in a position that held much respect and power, and
it is God who placed him in this position. John Calvin notes that in
other places in Scripture (Romans 13:1) it is clear that God is the one
who grants all power to human beings[^10].

Verse 19 then adds a fuller explanation to this power which was granted
by God. This is *clearly* a narrative peak in the discourse as indicated
by the use of a repeated participle construction, represented in the KJV
by “whom he would” (צָבֵא֙ הֲוָ֣ה). There are then four participle terms
used along with this. They each portray facets of his power, which
together create the narrative effect of *intensifying* one point –
Nebuchadnezzar was a powerful man. Knowing this intensive effect of
parallel ideas, we are able to read the English with a deeper sense of
the force of Daniel’s words: Whom Nebuchadnezzar wished…he killed
(קָטֵ֗ל), whom he wished…he caused to stay alive (מַחֵ֔א), whom he
wished…he caused to be exalted (מָרִ֔ים), whom he wished…he humbled
(מַשְׁפִּֽיל). This causes almost a fever pitch to be raised by verse
19, with a crystal clear message – Nebuchadnezzar was a man of
unparalleled power. People of all nations and languages feared and
trembled before this king. Commentators agree that this message would
also connote that Belshazzar was not half the man his grandfather
was[^11][^12]. Daniel was telling Belshazzar that his grandfather was
very great and he was placed into his power solely by God. This king was
great, but there was one who was even greater. Nebuchadnezzar was so
mighty – but he had recognized there was one who was “most high”.

Nebuchadnezzar Humbled (verses 20-21)
=====================================

In verse 20 a contrast is introduced. “But when his heart was lifted
up”. Nebuchadnezzar lifted up his heart and his spirit grow strong in
presumption. And this pride caused him to be deposed from the throne.
There is significance in that a Hebrew word for “humility” (מַשְׁפִּֽיל)
which will be used multiple times in this passage, has now in this
singular instance been replaced with (הָנְחַת֙). Nebuchadnezzar was not
merely humbled in his kingship he was *deposed* from it in a one-time
action. The king was given the power *to do* as he wished, but the King
Most High *did* as he wished. The same heart that was so lifted up is
also the same heart that was made like the beasts. This statement is a
retelling of what Daniel directly prophesied to Nebuchadnezzar in Daniel
4:25 before he counseled the king in 4:27 to avoid this fate by “doing
righteousness”. This counsel had gone unheeded, which led Nebuchadnezzar
to fall headfirst into the fate that was described to him. There is a
clear narrative contrast hear that takes the peak of verse 19 in
describing Nebuchadnezzar’s glory and matching it with the valley of
Nebuchadnezzar’s humiliation. The point of this contrast is to place
emphasis on the last portion of verse 21 – “till he knew that the most
high God ruled in the kingdom of men and that he appointeth over it
whomsoever he will.” At the end of the verse, God is identified with
(משׁל), rendered “sovereign”. This is a substantive adjective – God is
not *appointed* as the ruler (as Nebuchadnezzar was), He *is* the ruler.
The lesson of the peak and the valley is the same – God is the one who
rules over the kingdom of men. As powerful as Nebuchadnezzar was, God
was more so. God was uniquely the one whose rule was never an
appointment, rather it was a description of His being.

While this section of Daniel is narrative, it also borrows features from
other genres and employs literary devices used in poetry, such as the
intensifying parallel discussed earlier. As noted above, the “type” of
this discourse can be broadly categorized as a court confrontation,
which is similar to a judgment speech. These discourses typically
feature a commissioning of a messenger, a summons to hear, an
accusation, and an announcement[^13]. Using this as a guide, Daniel has
just given to Belshazzar the “summons to hear” which will now be
followed in verse 22 with the accusation.

Belshazzar Sentenced (verses 22-23)
===================================

Daniel’s vivid recap of prior events will now be applied to the heart of
this young ruler of Babylon in the form of an accusation. Daniel fires
at Belshazzar in verse 22 “And thou his son, O Belshazzar, hast not
humbled thine heart, though thou knewest all this;”. The contrast that
was set up in the earlier discourse was not accidental, but for the
purpose of bringing the lesson of Nebuchadnezzar to bear upon the life
of this young ruler. This statement makes clear that the humiliation of
a former king was also a warning to those who would come. There was a
metaphorical placard over the kingship of Nebuchadnezzar that said “Heed
this all kings of the earth”. The humiliation of Nebuchadnezzar was not
a private, individual event, but a public spectacle. It was a visible
picture of God’s rule above man’s.

The lesson Belshazzar should have learned from his grandfather’s
humiliation is inherent in the verse “hast not humbled thine heart”. The
intention was that he would take this example and humble himself. It has
been said that a quality of wisdom is the ability to learn from the
failure of others.

In verse 23 Daniel paints another contrast before the king and the focus
shifts from pride vs. humility to true vs. false worship. He addresses
Belshazzar’s feast and rampant immorality. They have brought out the
vessels of the temple of God and used them in their sinful indulgences
while praising false gods. A key feature here is painting the utter
inability of these false gods, which is common also in the Psalms (Psalm
115:4-8). These gods do not see, do not hear, and do not know. Instead
of contrasting this with an opposite parallel, Daniel makes the
comparison personal – Belshazzar has not honored the God who holds his
breath and all his ways. Instead of a direct contrast (e.g. idols
*can’t* hear, but God *can* hear) there is a near-far contrast (they
can’t hear, but God holds your breath). This makes a more impactful
statement than a basic comparison because it demonstrates the
powerlessness of idols against the power of God, in a personal way.

In the span of a few hours, Belshazzar has experienced his knees shaking
at the sight of the writing on the wall, the vivid retelling of God’s
power in contrast to that of his uncle, the accusation that he has not
followed this example, and now the narrowing of focus that this powerful
God Most High holds Belshazzar’s very breath in His hands. As the
contrasts (pride vs. humility, man’s power vs. God’s power, false gods
vs. true gods) are painted, they continue to narrow the focus personally
on Belshazzar. A picture is revealed of a sovereign God before whom he
has not humbled himself and before whom he has *no* excuse to hide
behind. Matthew Henry rightly notes, “This is the indictment against
Belshazzar; there needs no proof, it is made good by the notorious
evidence of the fact, and his own conscience cannot but plead guilty to
it.[^14]”

Belshazzar Condemned (verses 24-28)
===================================

Daniel then reviews the writing that was on the wall and moves into the
last part of the discourse, which fits the final “announcement” portion
of a judgement speech. In his own royal court, King Belshazzar has been
tried by the ruler that is above all rulers. He has been tried guilty,
and by his own conscience his mouth has been made silent. This speech of
Daniel has been a monologue, there have been no interjections and
interruptions from Belshazzar. It is now time for the gavel to land and
the pronouncement of heaven to be given to the case of this earthly
ruler.

Belshazzar hears Daniel utter the words of his sentencing: Mene, Mene,
Tekel, Upharsin. Numbered, Numbered, Weighed, and Divided.

Mene is written twice in order to signify completion, and possibly
expediency[^15]. Belshazzar has been weighed in the balances. This
beginning of the announcement portion is a different portion of this
judgement speech, but it is not a break in the flow of the narrative.
All of the narrative elements thus far have used stitching words
(“lifted up”, “humbled”, “Most High God”) in relation to one another to
keep the narrative driving forward on a central topic. As noted earlier,
the overall discourse has closed distance (past events into present
events, other people into Belshazzar himself) to zero in on the person
of Belshazzar and level the accusation directly at him. This repeatedly
mentioned “God Most High” was more powerful than his uncle, stronger
than the idols he worshipped, held his very breath, and now – *has
completed weighing him* in the balance. As Daniel interprets the
meaning, God has numbered your kingdom and it is brought to an end.
Although Belshazzar does not know it at the time, this is near-term
prophecy, which will be fulfilled that very night as he is slain by the
Medes (Daniel 5:30-31). John Brown of Haddington records that Cyrus the
Persian and Darius the Mede marched this night across a channel whose
gates had been left open due to the drunken revelry of the night,
allowing the opportunity for Belshazzar to be killed[^16].

Tekel (weighed) is interpreted by Daniel to show that the result of this
weighing is that Belshazzar has been found wanting (too light). This is
a reference to moral worth, as is made clear by the content of the
monologue leading up to this pronouncement as well as the scene of a
morally bankrupt party.

Peres (divided) is the final statement that flows from Daniel’s lips and
the last ring of the gavel. Not only will Belshazzar lose the kingdom,
but the kingdom itself will be lost. The partying heir of a once
powerful kingdom will now be the one with the name on the door as the
whole house comes crashing down. The interpretation is that Babylon is
divided and given to the Medes and the Persians. Some may wrongly
interpret this to mean that it would be divided *among* the Medes and
the Persians, but as history testifies, it would be to the former and
then to the latter[^17].

Conclusion
==========

This courtroom confrontation comes in between the account of Daniel’s
interpretation to Nebuchadnezzar in chapter 5 and his episode in the
lion’s den under Darius in chapter 6. Throughout the book of Daniel, a
clear statement is made that earthly rulers come and go, but God remains
sovereign over them all. Whether Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar, Darius, or
Cyrus sit on an earthly throne, there is one who sits upon the throne in
heaven.

There are clear contrasts made between pride and humility, the powerful
true God and impotent false gods. In the middle of these contrasts, the
lesson shines forth that God Most High is the one who deserves to be
honored and worshipped. He is to be worshipped by men of low estate and
kings themselves. He is Lord not only of Canaan but also of Babylon. He
is the one who truly rules over the kingdom of men, and who numbers
their steps. This passage demands a simple response – humility (5:19)
and praise (5:23). The failure of Nebuchadnezzar was unfortunately also
the failure of Belshazzar. Their pride caused them to praise things
other than God.

There are shadows of Christ throughout this passage, as the one who
glorifies the Father in heaven and the one who, in humility, honors God
in all His ways. His kingdom will never be divided and taken away.
Christ was never found wanting, and his weight is beyond measure. One
day, the consummation of his kingdom will be complete.

“And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a
kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be
left to other people, \[but\] it shall break in pieces and consume all
these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.”

Daniel 2:44

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Barry, John D., Michael S. Heiser, Miles Custis, Douglas Mangum, and
Matthew M. Whitehead. *Faithlife Study Bible*. Logos Bible Software,
2012.

Bilkes, Jerry. “Hermeneutics Lecture 9 - Prophecy,” October 30, 2015.

Brown, John. *Brown’s Dictionary of Bible Characters*. Edited by
Geoffrey Stonier. Fearn, Ross-shire, Scotland: Christian Heritage, 2007.

Calvin, John, and Thomas Myers. *Commentary on the Book of the Prophet
Daniel*. Logos Bible Software, 2010.

Dorsey, David A. *The Literary Structure of the Old Testament: A
Commentary on Genesis-Malachi*. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2004.

Henry, Matthew. *Matthew Henry’s commentary on the whole Bible: complete
and unabridged in one volume*. Hendrickson, 1994.

Jr, Walter C. Kaiser. *The Promise-Plan of God: A Biblical Theology of
the Old and New Testaments*. Grand Rapids, Mich: Zondervan, 2008.

Keil, Carl Friedrich, and Franz Delitzsch. *Commentary on the Old
Testament*. Hendrickson, 1996.

Köstenberger, Andreas J., and Richard Patterson. *Invitation to Biblical
Interpretation: Exploring the Hermeneutical Triad of History,
Literature, and Theology*. Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel Academic &
Professional, 2011.

Lange, John Peter, Philip Schaff, Otto Zöckler, and James Strong. *A
commentary on the Holy Scriptures: Daniel*. Logos Bible Software, 2008.

Longman, Tremper III, ed. *The Baker Illustrated Bible Dictionary*. ILL
edition. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Books, 2013.

Miller, Stephen R. *Daniel*. Vol. 18. The New American Commentary.
Broadman & Holman Publishers, 1994.

[^1]: Walter C. Kaiser Jr, *The Promise-Plan of God: A Biblical Theology
    of the Old and New Testaments* (Grand Rapids, Mich: Zondervan,
    2008), 211.

[^2]: David A. Dorsey, *The Literary Structure of the Old Testament: A
    Commentary on Genesis-Malachi* (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic,
    2004), 260–61.

[^3]: Tremper III Longman, ed., *The Baker Illustrated Bible
    Dictionary*, ILL edition. (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Books,
    2013), 185.

[^4]: Carl Friedrich Keil and Franz Delitzsch, *Commentary on the Old
    Testament* (Hendrickson, 1996), 9:614.

[^5]: Andreas J. Köstenberger and Richard Patterson, *Invitation to
    Biblical Interpretation: Exploring the Hermeneutical Triad of
    History, Literature, and Theology* (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel
    Academic & Professional, 2011), 257.

[^6]: Köstenberger and Patterson, *Invitation to Biblical
    Interpretation*, 338.

[^7]: John D. Barry et al., *Faithlife Study Bible* (Logos Bible
    Software, 2012).

[^8]: John Peter Lange et al., *A commentary on the Holy Scriptures:
    Daniel* (Logos Bible Software, 2008), 130.

[^9]: John Brown, *Brown’s Dictionary of Bible Characters*, ed by.
    Geoffrey Stonier (Fearn, Ross-shire, Scotland: Christian Heritage,
    2007), 155.

[^10]: John Calvin and Thomas Myers, *Commentary on the Book of the
    Prophet Daniel* (Logos Bible Software, 2010), 1:333.

[^11]: Stephen R. Miller, *Daniel*, vol. 18, The New American Commentary
    (Broadman & Holman Publishers, 1994), 162.

[^12]: Keil and Delitzsch, *Commentary on the Old Testament*, 9:614.

[^13]: Jerry Bilkes, “Hermeneutics Lecture 9 - Prophecy,” October 30,
    2015.

[^14]: Matthew Henry, *Matthew Henry’s commentary on the whole Bible:
    complete and unabridged in one volume* (Hendrickson, 1994), 1442.

[^15]: Calvin and Myers, *Commentary on the Book of the Prophet Daniel*,
    1:342.

[^16]: Brown, *Brown’s Dictionary of Bible Characters*, 156.

[^17]: Keil and Delitzsch, *Commentary on the Old Testament*.
