Puritan Reformed Theological Seminary

**Counsel in the Wake of Massacre**

Joshua Lamb

313: Reformation Church History

November 2, 2015

Introduction
============

The reformation period in France had many notable figures. While Calvin
is the most well-known, others such as Theodore Beza were influential in
guiding the church during this tumultuous time in history. French
Calvinists (*Huguenots*) had much hope that the government of France
would provide them with freedom of worship, but the events of St.
Bartholomew’s Day in 1572 dealt a devastating blow to the movement. In
the wake of this devastation, Theodore Beza and others provided council
to the churches that is timeless and relevant even for today. This paper
will examine the political intrigue leading to the massacre, the events
of the massacre itself, council during the aftermath, and modern
applications.

The Stage is Set
================

In order to understand the massacre of Saint Bartholomew’s day, it is
necessary to place ourselves in the setting of Paris at the time. French
culture as a whole was enamored with the idea of *Gallicanism*, which
can be described as a sort of nationalism that believed the monarch
should have equal authority to the pope[^1]. There was a cultural
perception that the state should be allowed a certain measure of
imposition into the religious affairs of the Catholic church. There was
also the view by the religious wing of the University of Paris (the
Sorbonne) that the ideas of Luther were heretical and calamitous. These
forces of culture led to negative sentiment towards the Huguenots within
the city of Paris, as well as a respect for the decisions of the
monarch. Another piece to consider is the information war that was going
on in the city of Paris. Catholic priests such as Simon Vigor were
vehemently attacking Protestantism – calling it the ‘cancer within the
body’ and encouraging that it be purged[^2]. The view by Catholics in
Paris was that Protestantism was a great heresy. This sentiment no doubt
helped the massacre to spread within and out of Paris on the fateful day
and months following. Meanwhile, the Huguenots began to develop a theory
of resistance, based on Calvin’s writings. In sum, this theory was that
if kings proved to be tyrants then it was appropriate and even necessary
to resist them[^3]. Storm clouds were certainly gathering over the city
of Paris.

In addition to national temperament, there are key players that must be
understood in order to get a clear picture of the massacre and aftermath
that followed. We start our examination with Admiral Gaspard de Coligny.
Coligny was a notable Huguenot leader and military commander. He was
very taken up with the protestant cause in France and sought to help the
group achieve a peaceful and independent existence. At the time leading
up to the massacre, his intention was to take his forces to assist
William of Orange in the low countries[^4]. Coligny had an amiable
relationship with the young king, Charles IX. We will postpone our
discussion on Charles for a moment and turn to the Queen Mother,
Catherine de Medici. Catherine was a woman of sweeping influence. After
the death of her husband, Catharine was thrust onto the world stage and
for the most part possessed great power until her death. She wielded
considerable influence over her son Charles and could be thought in many
ways to be the power behind the throne. Her objective was often to
strategically play the forces of Catholicism and Protestantism off of
each other in order to ensure that she retained influence and
perpetuated the Valois monarchy. Although she identified as Catholic,
religion was not really as important to her as maintaining a balance of
power. It is perhaps for this reason that she did not take kindly to the
friendship between Admiral Coligny and her son, the young king[^5]. She
reasoned that as long as Coligny held influence, that Charles may
eventually become Protestant[^6]. It is at this point that we have
record that Theodore Beza was in repeated contact with Coligny, warning
him of the danger that he faced from the royal court[^7]. In August of
1572 this danger became a tragic reality.

The Massacre
============

On 21 August 1572, Hoguenot leaders and noblemen gathered in the city of
Paris to celebrate the wedding between Catherine de Medici’s daughter,
Marguerite, and Henry of Navarre (son of the pious Queen of Navarre,
Jeanne d'Albret). It was thought that a marriage such as this would help
to heal the relationships between the royal court and the Huguenot
party. Although the participants celebrated the wedding, the
predominantly catholic city of Paris viewed the wedding guests with
contempt as foreigners and outsiders[^8].

All was safe enough until the day following the wedding, when an
assassin attempted to take Coligny’s life. His life was spared due to a
distraction, sometimes described as stooping to tie his shoe.
Nevertheless, he was still wounded by the bullet, and elected to stay in
Paris[^9]. This decision left the royal court in a state of panic. Would
Coligny order Huguenot troops to march on the city of Paris? Catherine
pressured her son into agreeing that Coligny must be eliminated. The two
great threats in Catherine’s mind were Spain without and the Huguenots
within. If civil war was to occur, why not remove the Huguenot
leadership while they were in Paris for the wedding? The next few days
surely afforded the greatest opportunity to strike. By the evening of 23
August it was agreed by Catherine and Charles that Huguenot leaders must
die[^10].

The orders were given and Coligny was killed at the hands of the Duke of
Guise and his body was thrown out of the window[^11]. Soldiers went
throughout the quarter killing many of the Huguenot leaders that were in
the city, along with some that were at the Louvre. It is at this point
that the spark was lit for the whole city to be set ablaze with
violence. Records indicate that the Duke of Guise ordered some of the
men to kill the Huguenots for “it is the King’s command”[^12]. While
this was most likely a directive for soldiers to take out the protestant
leadership in the particular quarter, it was overheard and spread
rapidly. When it reached the ears of catholic commoners in Paris, it was
likely they interpreted it as a license to act on the rhetoric they had
heard from catholic pulpits for quite some time. As a result, the
targets of violence spread from the Huguenot leadership to anyone in
Paris who had identified as protestant. The streets were overwhelmed
with bloodshed. People used it as an opportunity to settle scores with
neighbors. The level of rage and barbarism has been well documented.
Expectant mothers and young children were not safe. Huguenots were
dragged through the streets and thrown into the Seine river[^13].
Parisians used the opportunity to give full vent to their frustrations
over religion, politics, and everything else. Thousands perished.
Reports state that Catherine and Charles took pleasure in the violence
of the night, even sending letters directing it[^14]. The attacks
continued for weeks before soldiers were fully able to contain the
violence. As news spread of the massacre, Paris set a precedent for
several other cities in France. Tragically, many perished in these
places as well. News of the massacre reached Pope Gregory XIII, who was
gleeful over the killings[^15].

The Aftermath
=============

Word about the massacre traveled to Geneva. Beza and others mourned over
the massacres as they announced the news from the pulpit on the 31^st^
of August[^16]. Beza’s unheeded warnings to Coligny over the political
situation had been to no avail. Beza was not surprised that something
could happen, but shocked over the outcome[^17]. Geneva took swift
action to establish special prayer services and initiate contact with
local authorities[^18]. It is this decisive and swift action that
enabled them to prepare for the influx of refugees that were soon to
stream in from Paris and other cities. Within two weeks, there were
400-500 refugees that had come into Geneva, in need of food and shelter.

Although Beza began to fear for his own life, he nevertheless
spearheaded a citywide relief effort to help these destitute refugees.
He was deeply concerned about how they were being provided for and
sought financial assistance from the city government and also from his
contacts in the Reformed churches across Europe (Beza was on good terms
with several reformers outside Geneva, including Philip
Melancthon[^19]). These refugees were fellow Christians and in Beza’s
words “It deeply pains me, that we have almost nothing to give to these
miserable brothers who were shipwrecked in such a violent storm and
landed here almost naked”[^20]. A brutal winter and damaged harvest left
many in Geneva worn out and beaten down.

Compounding these physical needs were the lies put out by the throne
regarding the events of the massacre. The official report was that the
massacre was the king’s reaction to a possible Huguenot revolt. Much
time could be spent discussing the political sphere, but the greater
injury was the information put out the following months, accusing Beza
and others of sedition for helping the refugees that came into Geneva. A
man named Pierre Charpentier published a pamphlet in 1573 which accused
the pastors in Geneva of seditious behavior and in no uncertain terms,
being the cause of the massacre[^21]. Heinrich Bullinger urged that Beza
respond to these accusations in order to avoid confusing the Reformed
supporters in Europe. Beza and a Geneva companion, Simon Goulart, wrote
prolifically to combat this vicious misinformation that was rapidly
being spread.

The Company of Pastors in Geneva was now in the heart of a crisis.
Refugees were flocking to the city, well beyond what it could
financially support. The massacres had inflamed the tensions between the
Huguenot party and the crown. Wicked men had placed the blame for the
massacres on the very people that they had killed. Many Huguenot leaders
were not available because they had perished in the attacks. Now men
such as Charpentier who were once thought of as protestant were showing
their true colors as enemies of the reformed religion and slandering
Geneva in the press. Thousands of people were apostatizing back to Roman
Catholicism out of fear for their lives. Many of the faithful felt
abandoned by God. How were they to be addressed?

Council
=======

Beza and Goulart recognized the need to encourage and direct God’s
people during this trying time. It is important to note that Goulart
himself was in Paris and witnessed firsthand the massacre of Saint
Bartholomew’s Day before fleeing to Geneva[^22]. These men were well
acquainted with grief, and providentially placed by God to lead the
church in this difficult time. Their council focused on two broad areas:
resistance and submission. Although these two ideas may appear to be
antithetical, they were to operate in different spheres.

Firstly, the counsel to resist took up the Huguenot “theory of
resistance” that had started several years earlier. A few years prior to
the massacre, the Huguenot bastion city of La Rochelle had already
published in no uncertain terms that kings who became tyrannical were no
longer necessary to be obeyed under God. This theory of resistance, as
discussed in a previous section, was now *cemented* after that massacre.
In 1574, Beza published *Authority of Magistrates over their Subjects*
in which he argued that lesser magistrates had the role of resisting a
tyrant king[^23]. This was biblical and necessary counsel, further
clarifying a relationship between state and church that had been present
in Calvin’s *Institutes of the Christian Religion*.

Secondly came the counsel to submit. At the same time Beza was
publishing these works, he was also writing to encourage the faithful in
their walk among these circumstances. These downtrodden believers were
asking one question “*Has God abandoned us?*”. In order to answer this
question, we have to start with the posture of Beza and Goulart. Since
the beginning of the massacres, they were resolute in stating that God’s
hand was not shortened to save, and that believers were ultimately
hoping for a heavenly home[^24].

Goulart and Beza answered with the firm message “God has not abandoned
us”. What then was the reason for this great suffering? Goulart stated
there were three reasons for suffering: chastisement of sin,
demonstrating the genuineness of their faith, and teaching them to
glorify Him[^25]. Scott M. Manetsch summarizes that in the face of this
suffering, Goulart advised, “Christians should not become angry with God
or doubt his fatherly love. Rather, they must adopt a posture of
repentance and trust by acknowledging God's goodness, confessing their
sins, submitting to the divine will, and rooting their hope more firmly
in eternal life.[^26]”

Beza and Goulart used this wisdom to comfort many fearful Christians. In
public, they printed works analyzing and discouraging apostasy and
working with churches to conduct church discipline on those who had left
the faith. In private, they wrote letters they encouraged Christians who
were fearful and downtrodden. Beza’s letters focused on encouraging
believers to continue listening to sermons, partaking of the sacraments,
and reading the Scriptures in private[^27]. This council is valuable not
only for their generation, but also for the church today as it faces
intense persecution throughout the world. Even believers that don’t find
themselves in mortal danger will still find themselves in testing times,
because the Lord chastises every son whom He receives (Hebrews 12:6).

Modern Applications
===================

When we go through suffering, or address others in suffering, there are
things we are to *believe* and things we are to *do*. Goulart’s council
in particular is valuable, because it comes from a man that saw the
horrors of the massacre himself and went on to encourage others. His
three reasons for suffering are valuable to consider. We often ask “why
is this happening?” and while God has hidden specific details from us,
He has still provided much in His Word that is plain. Following
Goulart’s reasoning, we can ask: Is there sin in my life that God is
chastising me for in order that I would repent? Is this to prove my
faith as genuine, that I may be further encouraged in the Gospel? Is
this teaching me to depend on Christ in my weakness, that I might
glorify Him and be comforted by Him? These three questions represent the
three broad areas of thought that we can consider in times of suffering.
Our wise God has hidden specific answers from us in trials for the very
purpose that we would humbly lean on Him during them. Churches can
certainly use Goulart’s council in a variety of situations in which
people suffer.

After reflecting on these questions, we can use Beza and Goulart’s
council to encourage believers during trial. Combining their wisdom,
there are seven actions which believers can take: Acknowledgement,
Confession, Sermons, Scriptures, Sacraments, and Submission.

Firstly, the believer should start with acknowledgement of God’s
goodness in their lives. This might be the last thing the believer
*feels like* doing in trial, but it is vital to re-center our thinking
on God Himself. Recall past times in which God has been good. Meditate
on the Father’s goodness in sending the Son to atone for Sin. Think of
the goodness and favor of God in His election and adoption. Even amidst
fierce persecution, Goulart and Beza shows us in their lives that God is
faithful, good, and can be trusted.

Secondly, the believer should confess any unrepentant sin in their life
that God may be chastising them for as they go through trial. It is
important for the counselor to be aware that this may not be the cause
of their suffering. Blameless Job suffered. Christ the spotless Lamb
suffered. Nevertheless, this should still be an early step in the
process in order to be reconciled in communion with God.

Thirdly, listen to sound and edifying sermons which will serve to uplift
the soul and increase trust and love towards God. This world ultimately
is not our home, and we must in a sense “hear word about the heavenly
country” to which we are destined to reside.

Fourthly, private reading and meditation of the Scriptures has no equal
in benefit to the soul. It is easy for sufferers to lose sight of the
Word and wander off into vain thinking that God doesn’t love them
because of the harshness of external circumstances. But the Word stands
ready and calling to those who would read of God’s love towards His
chosen. Lady Wisdom is calling in the street, the water of life is had
without price to those who would come to the well and drink.

Fifthly, suffering believers should be encouraged to partake in the
sacraments. The Lord’s Supper is a special grace to remind us, in every
condition, of God’s love toward us in sending His Son.

Sixthly, the believer must be counseled to submit to the providence of
God in this particular trial. This is not a one-time counsel, but
something that is ongoing and repeated. In our list this is placed last
because it is often wrongfully addressed first. Believers should never
be exhorted in private to “just submit” without also placing it in the
context of wisdom like the other steps listed. God has provided an
abundance of grace to believers in trial, and those who counsel must
likewise be gracious towards those in trial. Ultimately, it *is* the
believer’s duty to submit in trial, but they are to learn and perform
this duty in the context of the means of grace God has provided for
them.

Conclusion
==========

We have the benefit of viewing the massacre of Saint Bartholomew’s Day
in context. We are privileged to see the counsel that flowed from the
pens of men such as Theodore Beza and Simon Goulart, to believers who
were ruthlessly betrayed by their own civil government. The question
they asked “Has God abandoned us?” has come from the lips of God’s
people all over the world. And God has appointed prophets, counselors,
and pastors to encourage God’s people that He has never once abandoned
them. A glimpse into one of the most horrific events in history shows us
that even there, God is faithful and present with His people. It is a
message the church must and will take up in our own day. As Simon
Goulart eloquently states, “There is no bodily or spiritual affliction
or grief of any sort, which cannot easily be overcome by the meditation
on the providence of God, especially of his special care for those whom
he has elected to salvation in Jesus Christ. To him be honor and glory
forever. Amen.”[^28]

BIBLIOGRAPHY

PRIMARY WORKS

*Registres des Conseils*. Archiv d’Etat de Geneve, 1572.

Simon Goulart. *Discours Chrestiens*. Vol. 28, n.d.

Theodore Beza. *Correspondance de Theodore de Beze*. Edited by Hippolyte
Aubert, Henri Meylan, and Alain Dufour. Vol. 1–21. Geneva: Librairie
Droz, 1960.

SECONDARY WORKS

Baird, Henry Martyn. *Theodore Beza: the counsellor of the French
Reformation,1519-1605*. Burt Franklin research & source works series
475. Eugene, OR: Wipf & Stock, 2004.

Diefendorf, Barbara B. *Beneath the cross: Catholics and Huguenots in
sixteenth-century Paris*. New York: Oxford University Press, 1991.

Fuller, Thomas. *Abel redevivus, or, The dead yet speaking: the lives
and deaths of the modern divines*. A new ed. London: William Tegg, 1867.

Grant, A. J. *The Huguenots*. Home university library of modern
knowledge 171. London: T. Butterworth Ltd, 1934.

Gray, Janet Louise Glenn. *The French Huguenots: anatomy of courage*.
Grand Rapids, Mich: Baker Book House, 1981.

Manetsch, Scott M. “Simon Goulart (1543-1628) and the consolation of
troubled souls.” *Calvin Theological Journal* 49, no. 2 (November 2014):
201–220.

Manetsch, Scott M. *Theodore Beza and the quest for peace in France,
1572-1598*. Studies in medieval and Reformation thought v. 79. Leiden ;
Boston: Brill, 2000.

*Registres des Conseils*. Archiv d’Etat de Geneve, 1572.

Roche, O. I. A. *The days of the upright: the story of the Huguenots*.
1st ed. New York: C. N. Potter, 1965.

Simon Goulart. *Discours Chrestiens*. Vol. 28, n.d.

Theodore Beza. *Correspondance de Theodore de Beze*. Edited by Hippolyte
Aubert, Henri Meylan, and Alain Dufour. Vol. 1–21. Geneva: Librairie
Droz, 1960.

Treasure, G. R. R. *The Huguenots*. New Haven: Yale University Press,
2013.

Zoff, Otto, E. B. Ashton, and Jo Mayo. *The Huguenots: fighters for God
and human freedom*. New York: L. B. Fischer, 1942.

[^1]: . A. J. Grant, *The Huguenots*, Home university library of modern
    knowledge 171 (London: T. Butterworth Ltd, 1934), 10.

[^2]: . G. R. R. Treasure, *The Huguenots* (New Haven: Yale University
    Press, 2013), 168.

[^3]: . Treasure, *The Huguenots*, 169.

[^4]: . Janet Louise Glenn Gray, *The French Huguenots: anatomy of
    courage* (Grand Rapids, Mich: Baker Book House, 1981), 127.

[^5]: . Gray, *The French Huguenots*, 129.

[^6]: . Otto Zoff, E. B. Ashton, and Jo Mayo, *The Huguenots: fighters
    for God and human freedom* (New York: L. B. Fischer, 1942), 135.

[^7]: . Henry Martyn Baird, *Theodore Beza: the counsellor of the French
    Reformation,1519-1605*, Burt Franklin research & source works series
    475 (Eugene, OR: Wipf & Stock, 2004), 249.

[^8]: . Treasure, *The Huguenots*, 170.

[^9]: . Treasure, *The Huguenots*, 170.

[^10]: . Barbara B. Diefendorf, *Beneath the cross: Catholics and
    Huguenots in sixteenth-century Paris* (New York: Oxford University
    Press, 1991), 96.

[^11]: . Gray, *The French Huguenots*, 139.

[^12]: . Diefendorf, *Beneath the cross*, 99.

[^13]: . O. I. A. Roche, *The days of the upright: the story of the
    Huguenots*, 1st ed. (New York: C. N. Potter, 1965), 138.

[^14]: . Gray, *The French Huguenots*, 143.

[^15]: . Gray, *The French Huguenots*, 151.

[^16]: . Scott M. Manetsch, *Theodore Beza and the quest for peace in
    France, 1572-1598*, Studies in medieval and Reformation thought v.
    79 (Leiden ; Boston: Brill, 2000), 32.

[^17]: . Baird, *Theodore Beza*, 248.

[^18]: . *Registres des Conseils* (Archiv d’Etat de Geneve, 1572), 67,
    136.

[^19]: . Thomas Fuller, *Abel redevivus, or, The dead yet speaking: the
    lives and deaths of the modern divines*, A new ed. (London: William
    Tegg, 1867), 212.

[^20]: . Theodore Beza, *Correspondance de Theodore de Beze*, ed by.
    Hippolyte Aubert, Henri Meylan, and Alain Dufour, vol. 1–21 (Geneva:
    Librairie Droz, 1960), 14:244 Translated by Scott M. Manetsch.

[^21]: . Manetsch, *Theodore Beza and the quest for peace in France,
    1572-1598*, 47.

[^22]: . Scott M Manetsch, “Simon Goulart (1543-1628) and the
    consolation of troubled souls,” *Calvin Theological Journal* 49, no.
    2 (November 2014): 207.

[^23]: . Gray, *The French Huguenots*, 157.

[^24]: . Baird, *Theodore Beza*, 251.

[^25]: . Simon Goulart, *Discours Chrestiens*, vol. 28, n.d., 35
    Translated by Scott M. Manetsch.

[^26]: . Simon Goulart, *Discours Chrestiens*, 28:33 Translated by Scott
    M. Manetsch.

[^27]: . Manetsch, Theodore Beza and the quest for peace in France,
    1572-1598, 43.

[^28]: . Simon Goulart, *Discours Chrestiens*, 28:270 Translated by
    Scott M. Manetsch.
